
4 of 39 DOCUMENTS

View Original Source Image of This Document   Go to Supreme Court Opinion
Go to Supreme Court Transcript

           SHAUN MCCUTCHEON, ET AL., Appellants, v. FEDERAL ELECTION
                             COMMISSION, Appellee.

                                   No. 12-536

                       SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

            2012 U.S. Briefs 536; 2013 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 3047

                                 July 25, 2013

            On Appeal From The United States District Court For The
                             District Of Columbia.

                                  Amicus Brief

COUNSEL:  [**1]  ELIZABETH KENNEDY, ADAM LIOZ, DEMOS, New York, NY, BRENDA
WRIGHT, Counsel of Record, DEMOS, Brighton, MA, Counsel for Amici Curiae.  [*i]

INTERESTS:  [*1]  INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE

   This brief is filed on behalf of amici curiae Communications Workers of
America, Greenpeace, NAACP, Sierra Club, the American Federation of Teachers,
Main Street Alliance, OurTime.org, People for the American Way Foundation, Rock
the Vote, U.S.PIRG, the Working Families Organization, and Demos. Amici
collectively represent millions of Americans who are concerned about the effect
of large campaign contributions on the integrity and responsiveness of the
United States government. A description of each amicus is included in an
Appendix to this Brief. n1



   n1 Pursuant to Rule 37.6, no counsel for a party authored this brief in whole
or in part, and no counsel or party made a monetary contribution intended to
fund the preparation or submission of this brief. No person or entity other than
amici curiae has made a monetary contribution to the preparation or submission
of this brief. The written consents of the parties to the filing of this brief
have been filed with the Clerk.

TITLE: BRIEF OF AMICI CURIAE COMMUNICATIONS WORKERS OF AMERICA, GREENPEACE,
NAACP, SIERRA CLUB, AMERICAN FEDERATION OF TEACHERS, MAIN STREET ALLIANCE,
OURTIME.ORG, PEOPLE FOR THE AMERICAN WAY FOUNDATION, ROCK THE VOTE, U.S.PIRG,
WORKING FAMILIES ORGANIZATION AND DEMOS IN SUPPORT OF APPELLEE

SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT

   This Court has long grounded its campaign finance jurisprudence on the
government's compelling interest in fighting corruption or its appearance.
Fighting the perception and the reality of a democratic government corrupted by
the improper influence of financial support, however, is more than just a
compelling reason for regulation; it is a responsibility of any democratic
government. Legitimacy -- the belief  [*2]  by the people that they are fairly
represented -- after all, is a first principle of democratic governance.

   Aggregate contribution limits function in tandem with base contribution
limits to protect the legitimacy of our democratic government by combatting the
perception and reality of corruption. See infra Point I. Aggregate [**8]  limits
ensure that no one donor can find ways to funnel hundreds of thousands of
dollars to a candidate or a party, and candidates and officeholders cannot
solicit huge sums from a single donor -- which evidence suggests would foster a
belief among the public that elected officials are improperly influenced by such
large contributions. At the same time, contribution limits impose only an
indirect burden on speech and thus are not subject to strict scrutiny. For these
reasons, this Court upheld aggregate contribution limits in Buckley v. Valeo,
424 U.S. 1 (1976) (per curiam), and has had no cause to reconsider this sound
principle.

   Appellants ask this Court to overrule settled precedent regarding
contribution limits at a particularly inopportune time, because even with these
limits in place public confidence in U.S. government is by some measures at an
all-time low. Public opinion data demonstrate that this lack of confidence in
government is tied to the widespread perception that government is more
responsive to financial supporters than to voters or the public interest, and is
corrupted by the improper influence of money in campaigns. See infra Point II.

    [*3]   [**9]  Recent political science research has demonstrated more
clearly than ever before that this public concern is not speculative or
irrational but rather quite closely tethered to reality. See infra Point III.
Campaign funding has long been the province of large donors, but the
near-dominance of a tiny fraction of the U.S. population over contributions to
federal candidates has escalated in recent years. Important new research has
documented that the wealthy have starkly different policy priorities than the
general public, especially on economic issues, and that government in the U.S.
responds differentially -- often dramatically so -- to the preferences of those
who are able to make large campaign contributions, even when these preferences
run counter to those of the general public. This particularly affects
communities of color, which are far less likely to be represented among the
ranks of those whose policy preferences appear to influence officeholders.
Campaign finance is a significant factor in this dynamic.

   Striking aggregate contribution limits will exacerbate problems of corruption
and its appearance. See infra Point IV. Without these limits, a small cadre of
donors will [**10]  be able to contribute millions of dollars to candidates,
parties, and political action committees, and candidates and officeholders will
be permitted to solicit large sums from potential donors, functionally reviving
the "soft money" system that Congress acted to end a mere 11 years ago. This
will provide further (and renewed) incentive for federal candidates and
officeholders to grant these donors improper influence,  [*4]  skewing policy
outcomes more and more towards the preferences of donors as opposed to those of
the general public.

   Perceptions of corruption are already at dangerous levels in the United
States. These perceptions are not irrational fears but rather reasoned reactions
to a system that is more responsive to the policy preferences of a narrow
segment of the electorate as a result of the improper influence gained through
large financial contributions. This Court must not risk undermining the
legitimacy of our Republic by overturning longstanding precedent to strike a key
bulwark against the reality and appearance of corruption of our democratic
government.

ARGUMENT

I. AGGREGATE CONTRIBUTION LIMITS ARE A LONGSTANDING MEASURE TO MEET THE
GOVERNMENT'S  [**11]   RESPONSIBILITY TO FIGHT THE REALITY AND APPEARANCE OF
CORRUPTION.

   Appellants challenge the aggregate biennial limit that currently caps the
total that an individual can contribute to all federal candidates, parties, and
committees combined at $ 123,200. See 2 U.S.C. § 441a(a)(3) (2011); 76 Fed. Reg.
8,370 (Feb. 14, 2011); FEC, Price Index Adjustments for Contribution and
Expenditure Limitations and Lobbyist Bundling Disclosure Threshold, Notice
2013-03, 78 Fed. Reg.  [*5]  8,530, 8,532 (Feb. 6, 2013). The $ 123,200
aggregate limit is broken down between a $ 48,600 ceiling on contributions to
all federal candidates and their committees, and a $ 74,600 limit on
contributions to all other committees (including no more than $ 48,600 to
committees other than national party committees). 2 U.S.C. § 441a(a)(3). These
limits are needed to ensure that donors cannot circumvent the complementary
limits on contributions to individual candidates, parties and committees, and to
serve the long-recognized governmental interest in deterring "the reality or
appearance of improper influence stemming from the dependence [**12]  of
candidates on large campaign contributions." Buckley, 424 U.S. at 58.

A. Aggregate contribution limits fight the reality and appearance of corruption
without unduly burdening the exercise of a constitutional right.

   Congress adopted base and aggregate contribution limits in the 1974
Amendments to the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA), which were
upheld in Buckley. Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971,   Pub. L. No. 92-225,

   86 Stat. 3. Though details of the protections have changed, their purpose to
fight the reality and appearance of corruption has not.

   Appellants challenge the aggregate contribution limits adopted in the
Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 ("BCRA").   Pub. L. No. 107-155, § 307,

  116 Stat. 81, 102-03 (2002). The court below upheld them,  [*6]  finding that
without the aggregate limits, "an individual might contribute $ 3.5 million to
one party and its affiliated committees in a single election cycle." McCutcheon
v. FEC, 893 F. Supp. 2d 133, 135 (D.D.C. 2012).

   In Buckley, the Court determined that [**13]  "[w]hile contributions may
result in political expression if spent by a candidate or an association . . . ,
the transformation of contributions into political debate involves speech by
someone other than the contributor." Buckley, 424 U.S. at 20-21. Hence, the
aggregate contribution limits entail only a marginal restriction upon First
Amendment rights, and thus this "quite modest restraint," id. at 38, is subject
to less exacting scrutiny than is a limit on expenditures. This core distinction
between limits on expenditures and limits on contributions has remained at the
heart of this Court's campaign finance jurisprudence since Buckley. See, e.g.,
Beaumont v. FEC, 539 U.S. 146, 162 (2002) ("[A] contribution limit involving
significant interference with associational rights passes muster if it satisfies
the lesser demand of being closely drawn to match a sufficiently important
interest." (internal quotation marks omitted)). n2 Appellant McCutcheon  [*7]
can exercise his associational rights by contributing money to as many
candidates as he likes, and is not barred from giving to any candidate, party,
or committee. He merely [**14]  has to abide by clear total ceilings on
contributions because Congress has determined that aggregate limits are
important to fight the reality and appearance of corruption and to prevent
circumvention of the base limits.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n2 Amici agree with, and do not further address here, the FEC's argument that
Appellants have presented no sound justification for the Court to overrule
Buckley by applying strict scrutiny to the contribution limits challenged in
this case. See Merits Brief of the Appellee at 25-31, McCutcheon v. FEC, No.
12-536, 2013 WL 3773847.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In McConnell v. FEC, 540 U.S. 93 (2003), this Court upheld a ban on "soft
money" contributions to political parties precisely because of the importance of
effective contribution limits to fighting corruption and its appearance. The
aggregate limits at issue in this case serve the same function -- namely,
preventing the inevitable reality and appearance of corruption when candidates
and officeholders solicit huge sums from [**15]  individuals with particular
policy agendas, and when such individuals are permitted to funnel contributions
well over base limits to key officeholders or party leaders. See Mem. of
Campaign Legal Center & Democracy 21 as Amici Curiae in Opp'n Pls.['] Mot.
Prelim. Inj. at 6-9, McCutcheon v. FEC, 893 F. Supp. 2d 133 (D.D.C. 2012) (No.
12cv1034(JEB)(JRB)(RLW)).

B. Government has a compelling interest in fighting the reality and appearance
of corruption to protect the integrity of democratic governance.

   Contribution limits protect against quid pro quo corruption and the
appearance thereof. As the Court  [*8]  has continuously recognized, rules to
fight the reality and appearance of corruption are necessary to protect the
integrity of democratic government and the interests of its citizens. "Our cases
have made clear that the prevention of corruption or its appearance constitutes
a sufficiently important interest to justify political contribution limits."
McConnell v. FEC, 540 U.S. at 143. The Court has consistently cited the danger
that large contributions pose to representative government, recognizing that
"[t]o the extent that [**16]  large contributions are given to secure a
political quid pro quo from current and potential officeholders, the integrity
of our system of representative democracy is undermined." Buckley, 424 U.S. at
26-27; see also FEC v. Colo. Federal Campaign Comm. (Colorado II), 533 U.S. 431,
440-41 (2001) ("[L]imits on contributions are more clearly justified by a link
to political corruption than limits on other kinds of . . . political spending
are.").

   The Court has written " . . . the primary interest served by the limitations
. . . is the prevention of corruption and the appearance of corruption spawned
by the real or imagined coercive influence of large financial contributions on
candidates' positions and on their actions if elected to office." Buckley, 424
U.S. at 25. In upholding FECA's original contribution limits, the Buckley Court
explained that:


     These limitations, along with the disclosure provisions, constitute
     the Act's primary weapons against the reality or appearance of
     improper influence stemming from the  [*9]  dependence of candidates
     on large campaign contributions. The contribution ceilings thus serve
     [**17]  the basic governmental interest in safeguarding the integrity
     of the electoral process without directly impinging upon the rights of
     individual citizens and candidates to engage in political debate and
     discussion.


Id. at 58.

   Congress is also entitled to take into account the fact that experience
"demonstrates how candidates, donors, and parties test the limits of the current
law, and it shows beyond serious doubt how contribution limits would be eroded
if inducement to circumvent them were enhanced. . . ." Colorado II, 533 U.S. at
446-47. The aggregate contribution limits serve to alleviate the threat of
corruption arising from solicitations of multiple donations from one big donor.

   While the prospect of an individual contributing more than $ 3.5 million in a
federal election, or candidates or officeholders soliciting hundreds of
thousands of dollars from a single donor through joint fundraising committees,
certainly raises the risk of actual corruption, government also retains a strong
interest in deterring the appearance of corruption that such large contributions
inevitably create. The Court has recognized that "[o]f almost equal concern
[**18]  as the danger of actual quid pro quo arrangements is the impact of the
appearance of corruption stemming from public awareness of the opportunities for
abuse inherent in a regime of large individual financial contributions." Buckley
, 424 U.S. at 27.

    [*10]  A democratic government has not merely a compelling interest, but a
responsibility, to prevent the loss of faith in government that is created by a
regime of large individual contributions. The Court has wisely recognized that
"Congress could legitimately conclude that the avoidance of the appearance of
improper influence 'is also critical . . . if confidence in the system of
representative [g]overnment is not to be eroded to a disastrous extent.'" Id.
(quoting United States Civil Serv. Comm'n v. Nat'l Ass'n of Letter Carriers, 413
U.S. 548, 565 (1973)). As the Court has written, "in Buckley v. Valeo, we
specifically affirmed the importance of preventing both the actual corruption
threatened by large financial contributions and the eroding of public confidence
in the electoral process through the appearance of corruption. These interests
directly implicate 'the integrity of our [**19]  electoral process, and, not
less, the responsibility of the individual citizen for the successful
functioning of that process."' FEC v. National Right to Work Comm., 459 U.S.
197, 208 (1982) (quoting United States v. UAW-CIO, 352 U.S. 567, 570 (1957)).
See also Cal. Med. Ass'n v. FEC, 453 U.S. 182, 194 n.15, 195 (1981) (noting that
the Buckley Court upheld base and aggregate limits because "such limitations
served the important governmental interests in preventing the corruption or
appearance of corruption of the political process that might result if such
contributions were not restrained" (emphasis added) (citing Buckley v. Valeo,
424 U.S. at 23-38)).

    [*11]  The Court should be wary of exacerbating fundraising dynamics that
put pressure on representatives to favor the positions of those upon whom they
rely for financial support. The Court recognized in Citizens United v. FEC, 558
U.S. 310, 361 (2010), that "[i]f elected officials succumb to improper
influences . . . ; if they surrender their best judgment; and if they put
expediency before principle, then surely there is cause for [**20]  concern. We
must give weight to attempts by Congress to seek to dispel either the appearance
or the reality of these influences."

   While in Citizens United Justice Kennedy wrote "the appearance of influence
and access . . . will not cause the electorate to lose faith in our democracy,"
this was in the context of examining independent expenditures, "by definition .
. . not coordinated with a candidate." Id. The Court has never doubted that
direct financial relationships between supporters and candidates or parties
present a serious risk of corruption and the appearance of corruption. In fact,
the Citizens United Court made this precise distinction, stating that "[t]he
BCRA record establishes that certain donations to political parties, called
'soft money,' were made to gain access to elected officials. This case, however,
is about independent expenditures, not soft money." 558 U.S. at 360-61
(citations omitted). The instant case, of course, is not about independent
expenditures; it is in fact about the type of large direct contributions given
by individual donors and solicited by candidates and officeholders  [*12]  that
characterized the "soft money" system [**21]  that Congress acted through BRCA
to end.

   Invalidation of the current aggregate limits would allow a single individual
to direct huge sums to federal candidates, committees, and parties in an
election cycle, and allow candidates and officeholders to solicit such sums
directly. Allowing such enormous contributions would give rise to the kind of
improper influence over federal officeholders that undermines public confidence
in government and its ability to be responsive to the citizenry as a whole. The
Court has repeatedly relied on its finding that "[t]ake away Congress' authority
to regulate the appearance of undue influence and 'the cynical assumption that
large donors call the tune could jeopardize the willingness of voters to take
part in democratic governance.'" McConnell, 540 U.S. at 144 (quoting Nixon v.
Shrink Mo. Gov't PAC, 528 U.S. 377, 390 (2000)).

II. THE EROSION OF PUBLIC CONFIDENCE IN GOVERNMENT STEMMING FROM CONTRIBUTIONS
THAT CREATE THE APPEARANCE OF CORRUPTION IS A SERIOUS, AND NOT A SPECULATIVE,
CONCERN.

   Appellants ask this Court to strike aggregate contribution limits at a
particularly inopportune time. Even with these [**22]  limits in place,
significant majorities of Americans express the concern that the actions of
their government are responsive to the wishes of financial supporters; that
their government  [*13]  does not represent their interests or respond to the
needs of the broad populace anymore; and that this reflects a corruption of
government and its ability to serve the public. The legal scholar Robert Post
describes "the growing fear that our elections are increasingly failing to
fulfill their democratic task, and that as a consequence the successful
legitimation of our constitutional government may be slipping from our grasp."
Robert Post, Campaign Finance Regulation and First Amendment Fundamentals, in
Money, Politics, and the Constitution: Beyond Citizens United 11, 18 (M. Youn,
ed. 2011).

A. Americans' confidence in government is at an all-time low.

   Where the public believes that government is corrupt, we can expect to see an
erosion of "confidence in the system of representative government." See Buckley,
424 U.S. at 26-27.

   Since 1958, the National Election Survey has included three questions that
pertain to corruption in government. Survey administrators [**23]  use these
questions to calculate the Trust in Government Index, which measures Americans'
faith in government on a one to 100 scale. In 2008, the last year for which the
Trust in Government Index is available, the Index  [*14]  tied with its prior
(1994) low of 26. Since then the indicia that make up the Index have all
declined. n3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n3 Am. Nat'l Election Studies, User's Guide and Codebook for the Preliminary
Release of the ANES 2012 Time Series Study 451, 454, 455, 489 (July 1, 2013)
[hereinafter NES 2012 Dataset], available at http://www.electionstudies.org; see
also Am. Nat'l Election Studies, The ANES Guide to Public Opinion and Electoral
Behavior, tbl.5A.5, available at
http://www.electionstudies.org/nesguide/toptable/tab5a_5.htm (last visited July
12, 2013). For example, in 2008 69% of Americans agreed with the statement that
the "government is pretty much run by a few big interests looking out for
themselves" as opposed to being "run for the benefit of all the people." By
2012, the percentage of Americans believing government is run by a few big
interests looking out for themselves had shot up ten points, to 79% of
Americans; the share of Americans who thought that our government is run for the
benefit of all had fallen from 29% in 2008 to only 19% in 2012. Voters'
responses to other questions making up the indicia show similar changes. In
2008, 51% of voters thought "quite a few" of the people running the government
are crooked. In 2012, that figure rose to almost 60%. In 2008, 25% said that
they trust Congress to do the right thing "most of the time," dropping to only
5.7% in 2012. Id.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**24]

   Further, the public has the lowest level of confidence in Congress on record.
A majority, 52%, has little or no confidence in Congress. This is the lowest
level of confidence for any institution on record since Gallup began asking this
question in 1973. Elizabeth Mendes & Joy Wilke, Gallup, Americans' Confidence in
Congress Falls to Lowest on Record, Gallup Poll (June 13, 2013). n4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n4 Available at
http://www.gallup.com/poll/163052/americans-confidence-congress-falls-lowest-rec
ord.aspx. The public's rate of confidence in the institutions polled was: the
military (76%); small business (65%); the police (57%); church or organized
religion (48%); presidency (36%); medical system (35%); U.S. Supreme Court
(34%); public schools (32%); criminal justice system (28%); banks (26%);
television news (23%); newspapers (23%); big business (22%); organized labor
(20%); health maintenance organizations (19%); Congress (10%). Id.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    [*15]  Americans do not just have low confidence in government generally;
this [**25]  lack of confidence is driven by specific concerns about corruption.
Six out of ten Americans worry very or fairly often about corruption of
government, and another quarter worry about it occasionally. Liz Kennedy,
Citizens Actually United: The Overwhelming, Bi-Partisan Opposition to Corporate
Political Spending and Support for Achievable Reforms, Demos 4 (Oct. 25, 2012)
[hereinafter L. Kennedy]. n5 Taken together, 86% of Americans are worried about
corruption of our government. Id. Similarly, 82% of Americans are very often,
fairly often, or occasionally worried about special interests buying elections.
Id.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n5 Available at http://www.demos.org/sites/default/files/
publications/CitizensActuallyUnited_CorporatePoliticalSpending.pdf.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

B. Americans believe their elected representatives are more responsive to
financial supporters than to constituents or the public interest.

   "Democracy is premised on responsiveness." Citizens United, 558 U.S. at 359
(quoting McConnell, 540 U.S. at 297 [**26]  (Kennedy, J., concurring in part and
[*16]  dissenting in part)). However, "[i]f elected officials succumb to
improper influences . . . ; if they surrender their best judgment; and if they
put expediency before principle, then surely there is cause for concern. We must
give weight to attempts by Congress to seek to dispel either the appearance or
the reality of these influences." Id. at 310.

   There is striking evidence that Americans believe that "politicians [are] too
compliant with the wishes of large contributors." Nixon v. Shrink Mo. Gov't PAC,
528 U.S. 389 (2000) (citing Buckley, 424 U.S. at 28). Sixty percent of Americans
say members of Congress are more likely to vote in a way that pleases their
financial supporters, while only 20% think representatives will vote in the best
interests of their constituents. Memorandum from Celinda Lake et al., Lake
Research Partners & Brian Nienaber & Ashlee Rich, Tarrance Group, National
Polling on Support for a Proposal to Tackle Big Money in Congressional Elections
2 (Feb. 1, 2009) [hereinafter Lake/Tarrance Poll]. n6 Two-thirds of Americans do
not think that voters and [**27]  donors have the same access and influence on
candidates. See Brennan Ctr. for Justice, National Survey: Super PACs,
Corruption, and Democracy 2 (Apr. 24, 2012). n7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n6 Available at
http://www.acrreform.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/Fair-Elections-Polling-2.6.0
9.pdf.


   n7 Available at
http://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/legacy/Democracy/CFR/SuperPACs_
Corruption_Democracy.pdf.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    [*17]  A recent study found that "[v]oters are deeply concerned that all of
this money purchases influence in Congress and drowns out the voices of ordinary
voters. When asked who has the most influence on Congressional votes, the views
of constituents ranked at the bottom of the list, while 59 percent of voters
said 'special interest groups and lobbyists' and almost half (46 percent) said
campaign contributors." Greenberg Quinlan Rosner Research, Voters Push Back
against Big Money Politics, Democracy Corps Nat'l Surveys 1 (Nov. 13, 2012). n8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n8 Available at
http://www.democracycorps.com/attachments/article/930/dcor.pcaf.postelect.memo.1
11312.final.pdf.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**28]

   "Just as troubling to a functioning democracy as classic quid pro quo
corruption is the danger that officeholders will decide issues not on the merits
or the desires of their constituencies, but according to the wishes of those who
have made large financial contributions valued by the officeholder." McConnell,
540 U.S. at 153. This entails "a subversion of the political process. Elected
officials are influenced to act contrary to their obligations of office by the
prospect of financial gain to themselves or infusions of money into their
campaigns." FEC v. Nat'l Conservative Political Action Comm., 470 U.S. 480, 498
(1985).

   These dangers are not imaginary, but real. For example, former Senator Wyche
Fowler described succumbing to influence from business interests who were
constantly asking for special provisions in the  [*18]  tax code when he was on
the Ways and Means Committee: "I am sure that on many occasions -- I'm not proud
of it -- I made the choice that I needed this big corporate client and therefore
I voted for, or sponsored its provision, even though I did not think that it was
in the best interests of the country or the economy.  [**29]  " n9

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n9 Martin Schram, Speaking Freely: How Congress is Compromised in the Great
Money Chase, Center for Responsive Politics 28 (1995). Senator Wyche's
observation is just one of many similar observations documented in Speaking
Freely.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

C. Americans believe that government's differential response to wealthy donors
is caused by the corrupting influence of large contributions.

   Professor Samuel Issacharoff describes the danger that "the electoral system
leads the political class to offer private gain from public action to distinct,
tightly organized constituencies, which in turn may be mobilized to keep
compliant public officials in office." Samuel Issacharoff, On Political
Corruption, 124 Harv. L. Rev. 118, 126 (2010). Those in positions of economic
power can use their financial resources to support the election efforts of
favored politicians to keep their power; elected officials can use their
political power to further the economic interests of their financial supporters.
A vicious [**30]  cycle can form where the economic and political power that
each group  [*19]  helped the other attain can be used to retain those gains.

   Professor Issacharoff identifies the danger as "the potential private capture
of the powers of the state," and reminds us that


     [t]he American recognition of the risk of legislation in the private
     interest dates at least to The Federalist No. 10, in which Madison
     identified as a central problem of republican governance the ability
     to resist 'a number of citizens . . . who are united and actuated by
     some common impulse of passion, or of interest, adverse to the rights
     of other citizens, or to the permanent and aggregate interests of the
     community.'


Id. at 129 (quoting James Madison, The Federalist No. 10, in The Federalist
Papers 72 (Clinton Rossiter ed., 2003)).

   This is in fact what the public sees in our modern democracy. Americans
believe that large financial contributions are the reason their representatives
are more responsive to private interests with financial resources than to the
public interest. Seventy-three percent of voters thought that the influence of
campaign money given to members [**31]  of Congress was a "major factor in
causing the current financial crisis on Wall Street." Lake/Tarrance Poll, at 2.
They thought large campaign contributions from the banking industry led to lax
oversight of the industry. This was true for three out of four Democrats (76%)
and Republicans (74%). Id. And, Americans recently reported  [*20]  feeling that
the federal government "is so corrupted by big banks, big donors, and corporate
lobbyists that it no longer works for the middle class." Greenberg Quinlan
Rosner Research, Money in Politics is a Ballot Box Issue, Democracy Corps Nat'l
Surveys 1 (May 9, 2012) [hereinafter Money in Politics Survey]. n10

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n10 Available at
http://www.democracycorps.com/attachments/DCorps_PCAF_memo_FINAL.pdf.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Americans fear that improper influence from private economic interests is
preventing government from acting to address their real problems. Almost eight
in ten Americans agree with the statement "I am worried that large political
contributions will prevent [**32]  Congress from tackling the important issues
facing America today, like the economic crisis, rising energy costs, reforming
health care, and global warming." Common Cause, Fair Elections Poll, Money in
Politics (Feb. 2009). n11

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n11 Available at
http://www.commoncause.org/atf/[cf/fb3c17e2-cdd1-4df6-92be-bd4429893665]/POLLING
%20MEMO%20FEB% 202009%20FINAL.PDF.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   And citizens see this improper influence as corruption. "Eighty-five percent
of Americans call it corruption when financial supporters have more access and
influence with members of Congress than average Americans," and "fifty-seven
percent say this is very corrupt." L. Kennedy, supra, at 3.

   Such findings present a serious challenge, because "[c]itizen distrust in the
democratic process  [*21]  threatens the health of a democracy." Molly J.
Walker-Wilson, Financing Elections and "Appearance of Corruption": Citizen
Attitudes and Behavior in 2012 37 (St. Louis Univ. Legal Studies Research Paper
Series, No. 2013-14, 2013) (examining [**33]  how appearance of corruption
undermines Americans' sense of political efficacy and deters civic
participation). n12 Striking the aggregate limits and unleashing direct
contributions of more than $ 3.5 million by one individual can only deepen the
public's already strong concerns about the integrity of their government. n13

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n12 Available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm? abstract_id=2231695.


   n13 Professors Nathanial Persily and Kelli Lammie question the notion that
the public perception of corruption is correlated with the "activity taking
place in the campaign finance system." Nathaniel Persily & Kelli Lammie,
Perceptions of Corruption and Campaign Finance: When Public Opinion Determines
Constitutional Law, 153 U. Penn. L. Rev. 119, 123 (2004). They recognize,
however, that "the inability of the campaign finance system to affect such
perceptions might be a product of the constraints placed by the jurisprudence
itself." Id. They also note that "[i]n the end, we must admit that large shares
of the American population distrust their government and believe the campaign
finance system is a source of undue influence." Id. at 174. It also follows
that, while current levels of confidence in government are uncomfortably low,
they could be worse if the few protections fighting the reality and appearance
of corruption were not in place or were dismantled.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**34]

 [*22]  III. AMERICANS' CONCERNS ABOUT DONORS' IMPROPER INFLUENCE OVER
GOVERNMENT ARE JUSTIFIED AND NOT SPECULATIVE.

   As the preceding discussion has shown, Americans are deeply concerned that
their elected officials do not respond to the needs of their constituents or the
public interest as a whole, but instead to the interests of the largest donors
-- implicating the very corruption danger the Court's precedents have
identified. See, e.g., McConnell, 540 U.S. at 187. Examining three related
empirical questions sheds light on whether Americans' concerns are grounded in
reality: (1) do the policy preferences of those able to make large donations
actually differ in significant ways from those of other Americans; (2) do such
donors dominate campaign funding such that we should expect candidates to
privilege their policy preferences; and (3) is government in fact more
responsive to the wishes of those with more economic clout?

   Answering these empirical questions is important for understanding the
compelling nature of the interests served by the limits on aggregate
contributions at issue in this case. After all, if the wealthier Americans who
are able to [**35]  make large donations held substantially the same views as
the general public, then their outsized influence on government policy might
matter less because it would not skew policy outcomes in a particular direction.
Similarly, if there were no evidence that government policies actually respond
more strongly to the preferences of those who  [*23]  fund campaigns, then
again, the public's concern about this might appear less compelling.

   The answers, however, are clear, and show that Americans' concerns about the
capture of their government by financial supporters are justified and not
imaginary. Important research confirms that the people who have the financial
resources to provide major funding to political campaigns have systematically
different policy preferences than the general public, especially on economic
issues; that contributions from just a tiny subset of Americans
disproportionately dominate campaign funding; and that our government responds
differentially -- often dramatically so -- to the policy preferences of the
wealthy. It is this reality that creates a substantial and realistic appearance
of corruption, and is a driving force behind the dismal figures reported in
[**36]  the previous section regarding public confidence in our electoral system
and public institutions.

A. The policy preferences of those who can make large donations differ greatly
from those of ordinary Americans.

   A substantial body of research documents the differing preferences of the
wealthy from the general public on many important policy issues. n14 One of the
[*24]  most revealing recent studies is Democracy and the Policy Preferences of
Wealthy Americans, carried out in 2011 by political science scholars Benjamin I.
Page, Larry M. Bartels, and Jason Seawright. Their study gives an unprecedented
window into the opinions of the very wealthy and how they differ from those of
other Americans. See generally Benjamin I. Page et al., Democracy and the Policy
Preferences of Wealthy Americans, 11 Persp. On Pol. 51 (2013) [hereinafter
Policy Preferences]. n15

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n14 Amici discuss the preferences of the wealthy here not because they are
concerned with the opinions of wealthy Americans per se, but because these
preferences serve as a reasonable proxy for the views of those who make the
large political contributions at issue in this case. As shown below, evidence
confirms the twin common-sense notions that large donors are more likely than
non-donors or small donors to be wealthy and that wealthy Americans are more
likely than other citizens to be large donors.
 [**37]



   n15 The study is based on interviews of a representative sample of
respondents in the Chicago metropolitan area corresponding to the top 1% of
American wealth-holders. Interviewees had a mean wealth of $ 14.0 million, a
median wealth of $ 7.5 million and an average yearly income of slightly more
than $ 1 million. Id. at 53.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The authors of Policy Preferences find that the preferences of the very rich
differ substantially from those of the general public -- especially on key
questions about how to structure the economy and respond to America's economic
needs. One example concerns the central question of how government should
prioritize job creation as compared to reducing the nation's budget deficit. In
polls conducted over the past several years, the general public has been
consistently more concerned with job creation and  [*25]  economic growth than
with reducing the deficit, often by two-to-one margins or more. David Callahan &
J. Mijin Cha, Stacked Deck: How the Dominance of Politics by the Affluent and
Business Undermines Economic Mobility in America, Demos 5-6 & 5 tbl.1 (2013).
[**38]  n16

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n16 Available at
http://www.demos.org/sites/default/files/publications/Demos-Stacked-Deck.pdf.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In contrast, when the high-wealth interviewees in the Policy Preferences
study were asked to name the most important problem facing the country, "[o]ne
third (32 percent) of all open-ended responses mentioned budget deficits or
excessive government spending, far more than mentioned any other issue." Policy
Preferences, supra, at 55. By comparison, unemployment and education "was
mentioned as the most important problem by only 11 percent, indicating that they
ranked a distant second and third to budget deficits among the concerns of
wealthy Americans." Id.

   This disparity concerning the importance of the deficit is not an aberration.
The Policy Preferences study finds significant differences across a range of
issues related to economic well-being and the role that government should play
in the economy. This is particularly true for policy preferences regarding the
government's role in encouraging [**39]  job creation and employment. A full
two-thirds (68%) of the general public believes that "the government in
Washington  [*26]  ought to see to it that everyone who wants to work can find a
job." Id. at 57 tbl.5. But among the wealthy respondents in the Policy
Preferences study, only 19% agreed with that statement -- more than a three to
one disparity. See id.

   Similarly, 78% of the public supports a minimum wage high enough that no
family with a full time worker falls below the poverty line, while only 40% of
the wealthy agree. A majority (53%) of the public believes that "the federal
government should provide jobs for everyone able and willing to work who cannot
find a job in private employment," but only 8% of wealthy respondents agree. Id.

   The Policy Preferences authors also find that its respondents were far more
likely to favor cutting spending on programs such as Social Security, Food
Stamps, and health care than was the general public, which instead would prefer
to see expanded government spending on such programs. Id. at 56-57 & 56 tbl.4.

   The Policy Preferences findings are particularly important because the
authors were able to isolate policy [**40]  views among a highly affluent group
of Americans corresponding roughly to the top 1% -- extending previous research
that had compared policy differences among more broadly defined wealth
categories. See Martin Gilens, Affluence and Influence: Economic Inequality and
Political Power in America 2-3, 70-96 (2012) (defining "affluent" as Americans
at 90th  [*27]  income percentile -- the top 10% -- earning at least $ 135,000
per year in 2010, and still finding significant differences in public opinion
based upon wealth). Taken together, this is exactly the segment of the
population that has the capacity to contribute large sums to political
candidates, parties, and committees.

B. The largest contributors already dominate the funding of U.S. elections.

   Candidates for federal office are heavily dependent on campaign contributions
from individuals. Adam Lioz & Blair Bowie, Billion Dollar Democracy: The
Unprecedented Role of Money in the 2012 Elections, Demos 12-13 (2013)
[hereinafter Billion Dollar Democracy]. n17 Even with current limits on
contributions in place, those who make the largest contributions provide
candidates with a huge percentage of their overall [**41]  funds. Data compiled
by the Sunlight Foundation shows that in the 2012 elections, over a quarter of
all of the identifiable political contributions to any candidate, party,
committee, or group came from just 31,385 people. This number represents just
one ten-thousandth of the U.S. population. Lee Drutman, Sunlight Foundation, The
Political 1% of the 1% in 2012, Sunlight Foundation Blog (June 24,  [*28]  2013,
9:00 AM). n18 The impact of this tiny cohort of the American public was so great
that "not a single member of the House or Senate was elected without financial
assistance from this group." Id.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n17 Available at
http://www.demos.org/sites/default/files/publications/BillionDollarDemocracy_Dem
os.pdf.


   n18 Available at sunlightfoundation.com/blog/2013/06/24/1pct_of_the_1pct/.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The relative influence of this elite group is clear: 84% of members elected
to the House of Representatives in 2012, and more than half of the members of
the Senate, received more money from the 1% of the 1% than  [**42]   from all
their small donors combined. Id. Other data show that candidates for the U.S.
Senate in 2012 raised 64% of their funds in contributions of at least $ 1,000,
from just 0.04% of the U.S. population. Billion Dollar Democracy, supra, at 13
fig.17. Indeed, in the 2012 elections "candidates got more money from a smaller
percentage of the population than any year for which we have data." Sunlight
Foundation, supra.

   Survey evidence also confirms -- not surprisingly -- that the affluent are
far more likely to make financial contributions than are other Americans. The
Policy Preferences study described above finds that a full two-thirds (68%) of
the wealthy respondents had made political contributions in the previous 12
months. Policy Preferences, supra, at 54 & 54 tbl.2. This compares with just
0.4% of the American population who made a disclosed federal contribution in
2012. Center for Responsive Politics, Donor  [*29]  Demographics,
OpenSecrets.Org (last visited July 19, 2013). n19 Moreover, as the authors of
the study note, "A remarkable 21 percent of our wealthy respondents solicited or
'bundled' other peoples' political contributions -- not an activity [**43]  that
is common among ordinary citizens." Policy Preferences, supra, at 54. n20

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n19 Available at
http://www.opensecrets.org/bigpicture/donordemographics.php?cycle=2012.


   n20 In addition, a nationwide survey found that 81% of those who gave
contributions of at least $ 200 during the 1996 congressional elections reported
annual family incomes greater than $ 100,000. John Green, et al., Individual
Congressional Campaign Contributors: Wealthy, Conservative, and Reform-Minded
(1998).


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The income gap in who makes campaign donations is accompanied by a racial gap
as well. A study of the 2004 Presidential election is illustrative. In that
campaign, the top-contributing zip code (located on Manhattan's Upper East Side)
was 86.4% white. This one zip code, home to fewer than 100,000 voting age
residents, generated more campaign dollars than the 377 U.S. zip codes with the
largest percentage of African Americans, home to 6.9 million voting age
residents; as well as the 365 zip codes with the largest percentage [**44]  of
Hispanic residents, with 8.1 million adults. Public Campaign, Color of Money:
The 2004 Presidential Race 3-4 (2004). n21

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n21 Available at
http://library.publicampaign.org/sites/default/files/2004_cofm_pres_complete.pdf
.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    [*30]  Further, "[t]he nation's biggest campaign donors have little in
common with average Americans. They hail predominantly from big cities, such as
New York and Washington. They work for blue-chip corporations, such as Goldman
Sachs and Microsoft. One in five works in the finance, insurance and real estate
sector. One in ten works in law or lobbying." Sunlight Foundation, supra. The
median aggregate contribution from this elite group was $ 26,584; this is more
than half the median family income in the United States. Id.

   U.S. Senator Chris Murphy has provided insight on how the need to solicit
donations from those with ample financial resources can affect officeholders. He
recently described the four to six hours per day he was required to spend
calling potential donors [**45]  in order to raise campaign funds and noted that
when making fundraising appeals, he "would not call anyone who could not drop at
least $ 1,000," people he estimated make at least $ 500,000 to $ 1 million per
year. Paul Blumenthal, Chris Murphy: 'Soul-Crushing' Fundraising Is Bad for
Congress, Huffing-ton Post (May 7, 2013, 5:40 PM). n22


     I talked a lot more about carried interest inside of that call room
     than I did in the supermarket . . . [The people I'm calling] have
     fundamentally different problems than other  [*31]  people. And in
     Connecticut especially, you spend a lot of time on the phone with
     people who work in the financial markets. And so you're hearing a lot
     about problems that bankers have and not a lot of problems that people
     who work at the mill in Thomaston, Conn., have. You certainly have to
     stop and check yourself.


Id.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n22 Available at
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/05/07/chris-murphy-fundraising_n_3232143.html
.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The record in McConnell, which addressed the [**46]  soft-money system that
would be largely recreated by striking the aggregate limits, was replete with
similar evidence of how public policy can be shaped by the corrupting influence
of such large contributions. Former Senator Alan Simpson testified that "Too
often, Members' first thought is not what is right or what they believe, but how
it will affect fundraising." McConnell v. FEC, 251 F. Supp. 2d 176, 481 (D.D.C.)
(Kollar-Kotelly, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part), aff'd in part,
rev'd in part, 540 U.S. 93 (2003). Former Senator Paul Simon recounted how
Federal Express obtained a favorable amendment to a bill without even a hearing
after contributing $ 1.4 million to incumbents and almost $ 1 million in soft
money contributions to political parties. One of his senior colleagues brushed
back objections by explaining "we've got to pay attention to who is buttering
our bread." Id. at 482.

    [*32]  C. Public policy outcomes in the U.S. are strongly responsive to the
preferences of the affluent, even when those preferences diverge markedly from
those of the general public.

   The differing policy preferences of the wealthy as compared [**47]  to the
general public would not present a challenge to the democratic vision of a
representative government if the actual influence of the wealthy on public
policy accorded with their numbers. The top one percent -- or one tenth of one
percent -- of Americans may desire very different outcomes than the broad
public; but by definition they are a tiny segment of the electorate, and could
not improperly sway policy outcomes by their numbers alone in a democracy guided
by the principle of one person, one vote.

   Increasing evidence, however, challenges this core assumption of democratic
governance in the U.S. It is no new observation that in fact the cohort of
Americans that contribute large sums to federal campaigns exerts a strong
influence on the political process and public policy outcomes. But, the degree
of influence that has been documented in recent studies should be sobering to
anyone concerned with the health of our democracy -- and should give substantial
pause in considering Appellants' demand to unleash the potential for
contributions of more than $ 3.5 million by a single individual in federal
elections. Cf. Citizens United, 558 U.S. at 361 (supporting government's [**48]
efforts to dispel the appearance or reality of "elected officials succumb[ing]
to improper  [*33]  influences; . . . surrender[ing] their best judgment; and .
. . put[ting] expediency before principle.").

   In Affluence and Influence, Professor Gilens set out to measure what he calls
the "preference/policy link" across the economic spectrum. Gilens, supra, at
70-97. His research examines the extent to which the policy preferences of
different income groups are reflected in actual policy outcomes in the United
States. His findings present a direct challenge to the notion that American
democracy ensures policy outcomes that represent the views of the broad
citizenry. Gilens writes:


     The American government does respond to the public's preferences, but
     that responsiveness is strongly tilted toward the most affluent
     citizens. Indeed, under most circumstances, the preferences of the
     vast majority of Americans appear to have essentially no impact on
     which policies the government does or doesn't adopt . . . The complete
     lack of government responsiveness to the preferences of the poor is
     disturbing and seems consistent only with the most cynical views of
     American politics [**49]  . . . median-income Americans fare no better
     than the poor when their policy preferences diverge from those of the
     well-off.


Id. at 1, 81.

   Professor Gilens continues by describing explicitly the power of the
preferences of the affluent to  [*34]  override those of the much more numerous
poor and middle class:


     . . . for Americans below the top of the income distribution, any
     association between preferences and policy outcomes is likely to
     reflect the extent to which their preferences coincide with those of
     the affluent . . . We saw above that less-well-off Americans have
     little influence over policy outcomes when their preferences diverge
     from those of the affluent. [Additional data described] show that this
     is true not only for the poor and the middle class considered
     separately . . . but for those policies on which the poor and middle
     class are closely aligned in opposition to the affluent.


Id. at 83-84. n23

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n23 While the preferences of the affluent are quite dominant across the
board, the divergence of influence is not equal across policy domains. Professor
Gilens finds that "the starkest difference in responsiveness to the affluent and
the middle class occurs on economic policy, a consequence of high-income
Americans' stronger opposition to taxes and corporate regulation. . . ." Id. at
101.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**50]

   This is a remarkable finding that challenges the vision of American democracy
in which government responds to the will of the majority: when the preferences
of the wealthiest 10% of Americans conflict with those of the rest of the
population, the 10% trumps the 90%. It underscores why Americans are so deeply
concerned that campaign funding prevents  [*35]  their elected officials from
acting in the interests of their constituents, see supra Section II. In the end,
Professor Gilens' exhaustive study of the "preference/ policy" link in the
United States leads him to some stark conclusions about the state of American
democracy. He writes that "[t]he patterns of responsiveness found in previous
chapters often correspond more closely to a plutocracy than to a democracy." Id.
at 234.

   Professor Gilens is by no means alone in his conclusions. Political scientist
Larry Bartels also finds that, in contrast to the affluent, low-income Americans
have little influence over policy outcomes. As he writes in his 2008 study,
Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age: "The preferences
of people in the bottom third of the income distribution have no apparent impact
[**51]  on the behavior of their elected officials." Larry M. Bartels, Unequal
Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age 285 (2008).

   Professors Gilens' and Bartels' findings are particularly troubling in light
of the demographic characteristics of the bottom third of the income
distribution in the U.S. As noted in a recent Demos report, over half of African
American households and 45% of Latino households are in the lowest third of
income distribution in the U.S. These researchers' findings thus suggest that
the majority of African Americans and nearly half of Latinos earn too little for
their views to have any impact on the behavior of elected officials. See
Callahan & Cha, supra, at 21.

    [*36]  Professor Gilens notes that the influence of the wealthiest Americans
on policy outcomes seems to be increasing. "The analyses of change over time" he
notes "do reveal an important general trend: the strengthening of policy
responsiveness for affluent Americans." Gilens, supra, at 193. This is important
because it suggests that government's skew toward the policy preferences of the
affluent is not an immutable reality, but rather may be responsive to changes in
opportunities [**52]  for influence, as well as particular policy or economic
conditions, over time. Id.

   The realities illuminated by the above research fuel the public perception of
corruption and certainly give rise to significant fears about "real or imagined
coercive influence of large financial contributions on candidates' positions. .
. ." Buckley, 424 U.S. at 25. n24

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n24 The concern discussed in this brief regarding the potential harm of
unleashing huge financial contributions in federal elections is centered wholly
on the role of such contributions in increasing the potential for corruption and
the public's loss of faith in the integrity of government. Appellants have
argued that aggregate limits cannot be supported by a desire to protect one set
of contributors "from the possibility that others will make larger
contributions[,]" Citizens Against Rent Control v. Berkeley, 454 U.S. 290, 295
(1981) (addressing ballot measure campaigns), which they see as an impermissible
demand for equalizing the voices of all donors. The argument in this brief is
based on an entirely different rationale -- it is based directly on the concern
about the reality and appearance of corruption stemming from large contributions
in candidate elections that would be unleashed by striking the aggregate limits,
and how such large contributions would contribute to the erosion of citizens'
faith in government.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**53]

 [*37]  IV. STRIKING THE AGGREGATE LIMITS WILL INCREASE THE DANGER OF CORRUPTION
AND AGGRAVATE THE APPEARANCE OF CORRUPTION.

   The preceding discussion demonstrates the public's eroding confidence in the
ability of government to respond to important public needs and to resist the
improper influence of campaign money on policymaking. This phenomenon is driving
a significant percentage of the public away from political engagement. Even in
2008, an election with record turnout, 80 million eligible persons failed to
participate. Susan Page, Why 90 Million Americans Won't Vote in November, USA
Today, Aug. 15, 2012, at A1 (reporting on Suffolk University/USA Today poll).
n25 In a poll of eligible persons who stated that they were unlikely to vote,
when asked why they did not pay attention to politics, 54% said, "[i]t is so
corrupt." Id. As citizens lose faith in government, levers of democratic
accountability are dismantled, and we lose the wisdom of the larger electorate
in determining the direction of our nation.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n25 Available at
http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/politics/story/2012-08-15/non-voters-obama-r
omney/57055184/1.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**54]

   Striking aggregate contribution limits -- which would allow a single donor to
funnel more than $ 3.5 million directly into federal election campaigns and
allow candidates or officeholders to solicit huge sums -- would alter our
political system in exactly the way that is most likely to further erode
confidence in  [*38]  government and foster the appearance of corruption,
perhaps "to a disastrous extent." Buckley, 424 U.S. at 27 (quoting U.S. Civil
Service Comm'n v. Nat'l Ass'n of Letter Carriers, AFL-CIO, 413 U.S. 548, 565
(1973)). The evidence suggests that removing these generous caps will lead to an
even greater gulf between the policy choices of government and the preferences
of ordinary citizens -- fueling cynicism, depressing political engagement, and
leading even more citizens to conclude (apparently accurately) that government
is more responsive to a narrow set of donors than to the broad populace.

   Americans' current perception of corruption in government and lack of faith
in public institutions such as Congress already presents a challenge to the
legitimacy of our democracy. When most Americans already believe that government
is run [**55]  by a few big interests instead of for the benefit of all people,
our democracy cannot abide further erosion of the campaign finance limits that
are the government's most effective tool in deterring corruption and its
appearance. NES 2012 Dataset, supra, at 454. Sixty percent of Americans already
believe that "public officials do not care what the people think." Am. Nat'l
Election Studies, The ANES Guide to Public Opinion and Electoral Behavior,
tbl.5B.3 (last visited July 12, 2013). n26 How will our Republic fare if that
figure continues to rise?

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n26 Available at
http://www.electionstudies.org/nesguide/toptable/tab5b_3.htm.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    [*39]  Finally, in striking aggregate limits, this Court would contribute to
public disenchantment with government by stripping the state of a popular and
effective tool. Despite their concerns about the impact of campaign money on the
integrity of their government, Americans have not given up on the belief that
limiting the size of contributions is an important answer. Nearly [**56]
three-quarters (73%) of all voters believe there should be common-sense limits
on the amount of money people can contribute to political campaigns. Money in
Politics Survey, supra, at 1. Of that group, a large majority (59%) is
"intensely committed" to such limits. Id. A large majority (60%) says
"candidates ought to tackle money in politics in order to make government work
for the middle class." Id.

   Faith in government and its legitimacy is a first principle. In its seminal
campaign finance case, this Court recognized that where the public believes that
government is corrupt, we can expect to see an erosion of "confidence in the
system of representative government." See Buckley, 424 U.S. at 26-27. We are
seeing just that right now. Although the full cure for this problem lies outside
the confines of this particular case, this case does present the Court with a
compelling need to do no harm, to not make matters worse.

   The U.S. Government has a compelling interest and an obligation to protect
its legitimacy. This Court should defer to the judgment of Congress that the
aggregate limits are a necessary means to that end, and are critical to prevent
further [**57]  erosion of citizens'  [*40]  confidence in government. The
limits on aggregate contributions reflect Congress' well-grounded judgment that
limits are necessary to deter the reality and appearance of corruption that are
so corrosive to citizens' faith in government. The Court has "understood that
such deference to legislative choice is warranted particularly when Congress
regulates campaign contributions, carrying as they do a plain threat to
political integrity and a plain warrant to counter the appearance and reality of
corruption. . . ." Beaumont, 539 U.S. at 155 (citing Buckley, 424 U.S. at
26-28). This Court should respect Congress' judgment, prior precedent, and
current political reality by upholding aggregate contribution limits.

[*41]  CONCLUSION

   For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the court below should be
affirmed.

   Respectfully submitted,

   BRENDA WRIGHT, Counsel of Record, DEMOS, 358 Chestnut Hill Ave., Suite 303,
Brighton, MA 02135, (617) 232-5885, bwright@demos.org

   ELIZABETH KENNEDY, ADAM LIOZ, DEMOS, 220 Fifth Ave., 2nd Floor, New York, NY
10001, (212) 633-1405a

Counsel for Amici Curiae


   [SEE APPENDIX [**58]  IN ORIGINAL]
