
13 of 39 DOCUMENTS

View Original Source Image of This Document   Go to Supreme Court Opinion
Go to Supreme Court Transcript

           SHAUN MCCUTCHEON, ET AL., Appellants, v. FEDERAL ELECTION
                             COMMISSION, Appellee.

                                   No. 12-536

                       SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

            2012 U.S. Briefs 536; 2013 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 3048

                                 July 24, 2013

            On Appeal From The United States District Court For The
                             District Of Columbia.

                                  Amicus Brief

COUNSEL:  [**1]  TREVOR POTTER, Counsel of Record, J. GERALD HEBERT, TARA
MALLOY, PAUL S. RYAN, MEGAN MCALLEN, THE CAMPAIGN LEGAL CENTER, Washington,
D.C., Counsel for Amici Curiae.  [*i]

INTERESTS:  [*1]  INTEREST OF AMICI CURIAE n1



   n1 This brief is filed with the written consent of all parties. This brief
was not authored in whole or in part by counsel for any party. No person or
entity other than amici or their counsel made a monetary contribution to this
brief's preparation or submission.

   This brief is filed on behalf of nine nonprofit organizations that are
concerned about the efficacy of our campaign finance laws and that work to
enact, implement and defend measures to protect the integrity of government. n2



   n2 A description of the amici curiae is attached as Appendix A.

TITLE: BRIEF OF THE CAMPAIGN LEGAL CENTER, AARP, ASIAN AMERICANS ADVANCING
JUSTICE, ASIAN AMERICAN LEGAL DEFENSE AND EDUCATION FUND, COMMON CAUSE, CITIZENS
FOR RESPONSIBILITY AND ETHICS IN WASHINGTON, THE LEAGUE OF WOMEN VOTERS OF THE
UNITED STATES, PROGRESSIVES UNITED AND PUBLIC CAMPAIGN AS AMICI CURIAE IN
SUPPORT OF APPELLEE

SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT

   In this case, plaintiffs-appellants McCutcheon and the Republican National
Committee take aim at settled Supreme Court precedent, and request that this
Court reconsider Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976), in order to strike down
the aggregate limits on contributions by individuals in connection to federal
elections at 2 U.S.C. § 441a(a)(3).

   In Buckley, the Supreme Court upheld the predecessor version of these
aggregate limits because it prevented donors from circumventing the base limits
on contributions to candidates by making "unearmarked contributions to political
committees likely to contribute to [their preferred] candidate, or huge
contributions to the candidate's political party." 424 U.S. at 38.

    [*2]  Appellants [**8]  attempt to escape this precedent by arguing that
Congress amended the Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA), as amended, 2 U.S.C.
§§ 431 et seq., following Buckley, and thereby resolved the circumvention
problems identified in that decision and rendered the aggregate limits obsolete.

   Appellants are wrong. They turn a blind eye to the real-world consequences of
eliminating the aggregate limits, and disregard the ways the limits continue to
advance the governmental interest in preventing corruption and the appearance of
corruption, as well as in deterring circumvention of the base contribution
limits.

   First, as outlined in Section I of this brief, the practical effect of
invalidating the challenged limits would be the evisceration of the base limits
on contributions by individuals to candidates and political parties under
federal law. Absent the aggregate limits, a single donor could contribute a
total of more than $ 2.4 million to the candidates of his favored political
party and over $ 1.1 million to the three federal committees and fifty state
committees of that party in a two-year election cycle. Through the mechanism of
joint fundraising, this [**9]  donor could avoid the burden of making hundreds
of separate contributions, and instead could write a single huge check to a
joint fundraising committee formed by some or all of these entities. The
proceeds of the joint fundraising effort could subsequently be funneled through
the participating committees to the donor's preferred candidates. Finally,
absent the aggregate limits, any  [*3]  candidate could solicit a million-dollar
contribution to such a joint fundraising committee, because the committee would
technically receive only "hard money" contributions -- even though the
soliciting candidate's campaign might benefit from this largesse. In short, any
serious inquiry into the probable practical effects of invalidating the
aggregate limits demonstrates that those limits are vital to preserving the
integrity of the contribution limits.

   Second, a review of Supreme Court precedent confirms that the aggregate
limits serve the governmental interest in impeding circumvention of the base
limits and preventing quid pro quo corruption and its appearance. Section II of
this brief demonstrates that the amendments to FECA following Buckley did not
address, much less resolve, the circumvention [**10]  concerns that the
aggregate limit was devised to allay. Despite changes to federal law, the
circumvention feared by the Buckley Court -- i.e., circumvention by "unearmarked
contributions to political committees likely to contribute to [a] candidate, or
huge contributions to the candidate's political party" -- remains possible today
absent the aggregate limits. Furthermore, the aggregate limits directly prevent
corruption and the appearance of corruption by blocking the recreation of the
party "soft money" system that this court deemed corruptive in McConnell v. FEC,
540 U.S. 93 (2003). These limits should be upheld.

[*4]  ARGUMENT

I. The Real-World Consequence of Eliminating the Aggregate Contribution Limits
Would Be Massive Circumvention of the Individual Contribution Limits.

   Appellants contend that the aggregate contribution limits are unnecessary
because adherence to FECA's other contribution limits eliminates any risk of
corruption. That assertion is demonstrably at odds with the foreseeable
practical results of removing the aggregate limits.

   A. Absent the Aggregate Limits, a Single Donor Could Contribute Millions of
Dollars  [**11]   to Federal Candidates and Party Committees.

   Under current law, the limit for contributions by an individual to a federal
candidate is $ 2,600 per election (and thus, a total of $ 5,200 to a single
candidate for a primary n3 and general election in a two-year election cycle). 2
U.S.C. § 441a(a)(1)(A). n4 The limit for contributions by an individual to a
federal  [*5]  political party committee is $ 32,400 per year. Id. §
441a(a)(1)(B). This $ 32,400 annual limit applies separately to each of the
three federal committees of a political party -- the national party committee
(e.g., the RNC or DNC), the party's Senate campaign committee, and the party's
House campaign committee. 11 C.F.R. § 110.1(c)(3). The limit on contributions by
an individual to a state political party committee is $ 10,000 per year, and
this limit applies separately to each of the 50 state parties. 2 U.S.C. § 441a
(a)(1)(D); 11 C.F.R. § 110.1(c)(5). Lastly, individuals may give up to $ 5,000
per year to a multicandidate committee or any other political committee that
gives to candidates ("PAC"). 2 U.S.C. § 441a(a)(1)(C)  [**12]  .

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n3 Every candidate is permitted to raise contributions up to the applicable
primary election contribution limit, regardless of whether a primary election is
held in his or her race. 11 C.F.R. § 110.1(j).


   n4 The dollar limits in the statute are indexed for inflation and are
consequently now higher than the amounts that appear in the statute. FEC,
Contribution Limits for 2013-2014,
http://www.fec.gov/info/contriblimitschart1314.pdf (last visited July 16, 2013).



- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   All of these contributions subject to the federal limits ("hard money") are
also subject to the umbrella aggregate limits of 2 U.S.C. § 441a(a)(3). All
contributions by an individual to federal candidates are capped at an aggregate
of $ 48,600 on a biennial basis ("$ 48,600 aggregate limit"), 2 U.S.C. § 441a
(a)(3)(A), and all contributions by an individual to non-candidate political
committees (including party committees) are capped at $ 74,600 biennially ("$
74,600 aggregate [**13]  limit"), id. § 441a(a)(3)(B).

   These aggregate limits are crucial to making the base contribution limits
effective. Without the $ 48,600 aggregate limit, a single donor could contribute
$ 5,200 to every Republican or Democratic House and Senate candidate in an
election cycle. In aggregate, this individual could contribute $ 2,433,600 to
all the federal candidates of one party (given 468 federal  [*6]  elections per
cycle, not including run-offs or presidential candidates).

   Eliminating the $ 74,600 aggregate limit would also enable a single donor to
give similarly massive contributions to party committees. By contributing $
32,400 to each of a party's three federal party committees each year, a single
donor could give $ 194,400 to just the national party in a two-year election
cycle. The same donor could give $ 1 million to that party's state committees by
contributing $ 10,000 a year (or $ 20,000 in a two-year cycle) to each of that
party's 50 state committees. By this means, a single wealthy donor could
contribute $ 1,194,400 to one party's committees in a single election cycle.
Combined with the contributions that could be made directly to that party's
candidates, a single [**14]  donor could provide $ 3,628,000 in "limited" hard
money contributions to a party and its federal candidates in a single election
cycle.

   Finally, the same individual could also contribute to an indeterminate -- but
potentially vast -- number of PACs aligned with his partisan or ideological
interests. In the 2012 elections, over 2,757 "non-connected" PACs (not including
independent expenditure-only PACs) were active. See FEC, FEC Summarizes Campaign
Activity of the 2011-2012 Election Cycle (Apr. 19, 2013),
http://www.fec.gov/press/press2013/20130419_2012-24m-Summary.shtml. If those
committees are roughly split between the two major parties in terms of
ideological orientation, donors theoretically could give $ 10,000 to over 1,350
PACs aligned with their  [*7]  interests, or approximately $ 13.5 million, in a
two-year election cycle. Even assuming conservatively that only 10% of these
ideologically-aligned committees are "likely to contribute to [the donor's
preferred] candidate[s]," as described in Buckley, that donor would have another
outlet for over $ 1,350,000 in contributions in an election cycle.

   It is only the aggregate limits that prevent the flow of [**15]  such massive
and plainly corrupting donations from donors seeking political influence to
federal candidates and party leaders.

B. Invalidation of the Aggregate Limits Would Transform Political Party
Committees Into "Soft Money" Vehicles for Donors Seeking to Circumvent the Base
Limits.

1. Laws Permitting Joint Fundraising and Unlimited Internal Party Transfers
Would Facilitate Circumvention.

   It is not at all far-fetched to foresee that political parties would become
vehicles for circumvention in the absence of aggregate limits: the law has
mechanisms already in place that would facilitate a political party's efforts to
raise, organize and spend such money, and those mechanisms are already used by
parties and their candidates within the limits of current law.

   Simply put, "joint fundraising" allows two or more political committees --
including "political party  [*8]  committees . . . candidate committees [and]
multi-candidate committees" -- to form a committee exclusively for joint
fundraising efforts. 11 C.F.R. § 102.17(a)(2). A donor may make a single check
to the joint fundraising committee equaling the "total amount that the
contributor [**16]  could contribute to all of the participants under the
applicable limits." Id. § 102.17(c)(5). This check is then "split" between the
participating committees according to written agreement, but a participant's
allocation cannot exceed its applicable contribution limit. Id. § 102.17(c)(6).

   Using this mutually beneficial arrangement, parties and candidates can
coordinate their fundraising efforts without running afoul of contribution
limits. Most importantly, donors are relieved of the logistical challenge of
making separate contributions to an array of different committees, and instead
can simply write one check to a joint fundraising entity and receive immediate
recognition for their largesse. Finally, in the case of a joint fundraising
committee established between a candidate and party committees, a donor can not
only contribute to the participating candidate, but also "signal" his interest
in having the party committees use their allocated share of the proceeds to
support this candidate.

   In its simplest iteration, for example, a presidential candidate can form a
joint fundraising committee with the candidate's national party and raise $
37,600 in a single check, of which [**17]  $ 5,200 can be dispersed to the
candidate and $ 32,400 to the national party committee. Variants of this model
were used by both  [*9]  the Democratic and Republican presidential nominees in
the 2008 and 2012 elections. See Section I.B.2 infra.

   Eliminate the aggregate limits, however, and these joint fundraising
committees would be able to receive single checks of astronomical amounts from
individual donors. A candidate could join with the three federal party
committees to form a joint fundraising committee that could receive checks of $
102,400 (with $ 32,400 applied to the contribution limit of each party committee
and $ 5,200 applied to the limit of the candidate's campaign committee). Nothing
would prevent these participants from adding the 50 state parties to their
effort. The massive joint fundraising committee that would result could receive
a huge check totaling $ 602,400 in a year from a single individual (with $
97,200 allocated to the national party committees, $ 500,000 to the state party
committees and $ 5,200 to the candidate campaign committee). And in a two-year
election cycle, the total amount that could be raised would nearly double to
approximately [**18]  $ 1.2 million.

   Second, federal law allows for unrestricted transfers between, inter alia,
national and state party committees of the same party; and joint fundraising
committee participants. See 2 U.S.C. § 441a(a)(4); 11 C.F.R. § 110.3(c)(1), (2).
The law also permits candidates to transfer money to national, state and local
committees of their political party without limit. 2 U.S.C. § 439a(a)(4).

    [*10]  In the case of a joint fundraising committee, the liberal transfer
rules allow money jointly raised and subsequently allocated between the
participating committees to be quickly routed back to a single committee. Thus,
the joint fundraising committee discussed above, i.e., "Entire Party Joint
Fundraising Committee," could take a donor's $ 602,000 check and allocate that
money to the participating candidate committee and each of the party committees
in order to attribute it to each participant's contribution limit. Then,
however, all of the participating committees could each transfer their allocated
amount back to a single federal party committee, such as the DNC or RNC. Because
these allocations and [**19]  transfers can be performed electronically and
instantaneously, most of the donor's $ 602,000 check made out to "Entire Party
Joint Fundraising Committee" could quickly end up being deposited into a single
federal party committee's bank account.

   Finally, the contributions aggregated in a federal party committee account
could ultimately be used to benefit the candidate who had participated in the
joint fundraising effort. The national party can contribute $ 5,000 directly to
a candidate, 2 U.S.C. § 441a(a)(1)(C), and then donate significantly more in the
form of coordinated expenditures. Id. § 441a(d). Coordinated party expenditures
do not count against the party's contribution limit, but are subject to a
different and higher set of limits: most recently, $ 21,684,200 for presidential
nominees; a range from $ 91,200 to $ 2,593,100 for Senate nominees; and  [*11]
$ 45,600 or $ 91,200 for House nominees. See FEC, Coordinated Party Expenditure
Limits 2012, http://www.fec.gov/info/charts_441ad_2012.shtml (last visited July
12, 2013). Once the coordinated spending limit is reached, parties can make
unlimited independent expenditures in support of a [**20]  candidate, such as
for express advocacy advertisements or GOTV in the relevant jurisdiction. Thus,
by contributing to a joint fundraising committee formed by a favored candidate
and multiple committees of that candidate's party, donors can signal to the
participants, without triggering the earmarking rules, that their entire
contribution should ultimately be used to support the participating candidate.

   In short, without the aggregate limits, joint fundraising and unrestricted
intra-party transfers would make the parties effective vehicles for
circumvention because these techniques streamline the donation process for
influence-seeking donors and enable such donors to communicate to party
committees the identity of their preferred candidates.

2. The Practice of Joint Fundraising Is Not Hypothetical.

   There can be no doubt that joint fundraising is legal. The FEC has permitted
the use of "joint fundraising committees" in its regulations for at least 30
years. See Transfers of Funds, Collecting Agents and Joint Fundraising,
Explanation and Justification, 48 Fed. Reg. 26296 (June 7, 1983) (codified as
amended  [*12]  at 11 C.F.R. § 102.17 [**21]  ). Appellants acknowledge as much,
stating that "joint-fundraising contributions are hard money, for which Congress
has already satisfied its conduit-contribution concern." RNC Br. 47.

   It is thus paradoxical that appellants also attempt to characterize joint
fundraising, as described by the district court, as a "far-fetched"
"hypothetical scenario." McCutcheon Br. 44-45. One can only assume they deny
this reality in an attempt to undercut the lower court's finding that absent the
aggregate limits, joint fundraising would offer a simple technique for donors
seeking to direct "half-a-million dollars" to their candidates of choice without
running afoul of the earmarking rules. McCutcheon v. FEC, 893 F. Supp. 2d 133,
140 (D.D.C. 2012). But there is nothing hypothetical about joint fundraising. It
is a fundraising practice that has been in regular use for over a decade, and
there is no serious doubt about its existence or efficacy.

   The use of joint fundraising committees first began in earnest in 2000, and
was initially prevalent in Senate races. n5 During the 2000 election, 21 Senate
candidates, including 14 Democrats and seven Republicans, formed joint
fundraising [**22]  committees with party committees. n6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n5 Anthony Corrado, Party Finance in the 2000 Elections: The Federal Role of
Soft Money Financing, 34 Ariz. St. L.J. 1025, 1040 (2002).


   n6 Id. at 1041.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    [*13]  Joint fundraising committees were established by presidential
candidates in the 2000 and 2004 elections, but not until 2008 did this technique
became "a central component of both the candidates' and parties' fundraising
strategies." n7 In 2008, then-presidential nominee Barack Obama and the DNC
established a joint fundraising committee that could accept checks of over $
33,000. n8 Then-presidential nominee John McCain was connected to a somewhat
more complex joint fundraising effort involving the RNC, certain state
Republican parties, and his campaign's compliance fund that accepted as much as
$ 70,000 per donor. n9 In total, "the McCain campaign and Republican Party
committees raised approximately $ 221 million through ten separate [joint
fundraising committees]," while Obama [**23]  and the Democratic Party  [*14]
raised "approximately $ 228 million through three [joint fundraising
committees]." n10

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n7 Keena Lipsitz & Costas Panagopoulos, Filled Coffers: Campaign
Contributions and Contributors in the 2008 Elections, 13 J. Pol. Marketing 21,
48 (2011).


   n8 Michael Luo & Griff Palmer, In Fine Print, a Proliferation of Large Donors
, N.Y. Times, Oct. 20, 2008,
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/21/us/politics/21donate.html.


   n9 Matthew Mosk, McCain Able to Skirt Limits of Federal Financing, Wash.
Post, Sept. 17, 2008,
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/09/16/AR2008091603321.
html. For more on the presidential joint fundraising committees in 2008, see
Ctr. for Responsive Pol., Joint Fundraising Committees,
http://www.opensecrets.org/pres08/jfc.php?cycle=2008 (last visited July 12,
2013).


   n10 Michael E. Toner, The Impact of Federal Election Laws on the 2008
Presidential Election, in The Year of Obama: How Barack Obama Won the White
House 149, 156 (Larry J. Sabato ed., 2009).


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**24]

   The total amount raised by presidential joint fundraising committees
increased substantially in the 2012 elections. Romney's joint fundraising
committee, Romney Victory, raised over $ 492 million, and Obama's committees,
Obama Victory Fund and Swing State Victory Fund, raised over $ 460 million. n11

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n11 Ctr. for Responsive Pol., Joint Fundraising Committees,
http://www.opensecrets.org/pres12/jfc.php (last visited July 2, 2013).


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   All of this information is publicly available on the FEC's website, and it is
improbable that appellants are unaware of these facts. n12 They therefore have
no basis for their skepticism regarding the existence of joint fundraising.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n12 Fundraising totals for particular joint fundraising committees can be
found using the FEC's online search engine, available at
http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/candcmte_info.shtml. Conducting an
advanced search by committee type (i.e., "Joint Fundraising Committee") further
reveals that there are over 300 joint fundraising committees active in 2013,
confirming that the practice remains widespread.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**25]

   The evidence also indicates that presidential joint fundraising committees
were designed to ensure that the fundraising proceeds allocated to the
participating party committees were in large part used to  [*15]  benefit the
"headlining" candidate. In 2012, Romney Victory accepted checks as large as $
75,800, n13 and allocated $ 40,000 "to state GOP accounts in Idaho,
Massachusetts, Oklahoma, and Vermont," none of which were swing states in the
2012 election. n14 These state parties were chosen as participants in the joint
fundraising effort because they could be counted on to transfer the money to
battleground states. n15 As a Republican fundraiser stated, "I guarantee the
reason they're asking for those is [because] they can control them." n16 The
fact that three of the four state parties receiving Romney Victory funds were
headed by Romney loyalists "provide[d] the Romney camp with assurance that the
money will be transferred to swing-state parties as the campaign desires and not
be diverted to other efforts." n17

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n13 See Kenneth P. Vogel & Abby Phillip, Mitt Romney winning mega-donor war,
Politico, June 21, 2012, http://www. politico.com/news/stories/0612/77680.html.
 [**26]



   n14 David M. Drucker, Mitt Romney's Fundraising Boost Stems From Unique
Tactic, Roll Call, July 30, 2012,
http://www.rollcall.com/issues/58_13/Mitt-Romneys-Fundraising-Boost-Stems-From-U
nique-Tactic-216525-1.html.


   n15 Id.


   n16 Id.


   n17 Paul Blumenthal, Romney Victory Raises $ 140 Million, Exploits Campaign
Finance Loophole, Huffington Post, July 16, 2012,
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/07/16/romney-victory-fundraising_n_1675231.ht
ml.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In short, the use of joint fundraising as an informal means of "earmarking"
contributions is far from  [*16]  "hypothetical," see McCutcheon Br. 44; it is
now standard practice. n18

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n18 Appellants also argue that prohibiting joint fundraising would be a more
narrowly tailored solution for circumvention than retaining the aggregate
limits. McCutcheon Br. 60. But this assertion -- even insofar as it is relevant
given that the "least restrictive means" test is inapplicable here, see, e.g.,
California Med. Ass'n v. FEC (CalMed), 453 U.S. 182, 199 n.20 (1981) -- rests on
the faulty premise that joint fundraising is the only means of circumventing the
base contribution limits. But this Court has noted multiple ways that donors
circumvent the contribution limits without earmarking. Buckley warned of the
dangers entailed in the "use of unearmarked contributions to political
committees likely to contribute to [preferred] candidates" even though joint
fundraising had not been developed in any significant way in 1976. And in
Colorado II, the Court expressed concern that a party "tallying" system, i.e., a
party's informal records of its candidates' fundraising, furthered circumvention
without necessarily triggering the earmarking restrictions. 533 U.S. at 459.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**27]

C. Invalidation of the Aggregate Limits Would Multiply Candidate-to-Candidate
Contributions and Reinvigorate the Practice of "Soft Money" Solicitations by
Federal Candidates and Officeholders.

1. In the Absence of the Aggregate Limits, Candidates Could Participate in
Massive Circumvention Schemes.

   Eliminate the aggregate limits, and candidates would control two vehicles for
large-scale circumvention -- namely, their campaign committees and their
leadership committees. A candidate may contribute  [*17]  $ 4,000 from his
campaign committee to another candidate in a two-year election cycle. 11 C.F.R.
§ 102.12(c)(2). In addition, candidates may establish a "leadership PAC," which
is simply a multicandidate committee that is controlled or maintained by an
officeholder or candidate. See 2 U.S.C. § 434(i)(8)(B); 11 C.F.R. § 100.5(e)(6).
A leadership PAC, like any multicandidate committee, may contribute up to $
5,000 to another candidate. 2 U.S.C. § 441a(a)(1)(C).

   As discussed in Section I.A. supra, without the aggregate limits, donors
could give more than $ 2.4 million [**28]  to the campaign committees of their
preferred party's candidates. They could also give to the leadership PACs that
many candidates have established. These funds would not have to remain dispersed
in the committees of 400 or more candidates. Donors could indicate with a "wink
and a nod" or other informal means that certain recipients should transfer their
contributions to their favored candidate. According to the FEC, there were 1,949
congressional candidates in the 2012 elections, and in addition, 532 active
leadership PACs. n19 Even if only a fraction of these committees were willing to
serve as conduits for a big donor seeking to circumvent the base limits,  [*18]
there would still be potentially hundreds of committees available to this donor.


- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n19 FEC Summarizes Campaign Activity, http://www.fec.gov/
press/press2013/20130419_2012-24m-Summary.shtml. A candidate's campaign
committee and his leadership PAC are not considered affiliated committees, see
11 C.F.R. § 100.5(g)(5). Consequently, each may separately contribute to a given
candidate, and are not deemed to be a single committee for the purposes of the
contribution limits.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**29]

   Further, to accomplish the circumvention scheme described above, a donor
would not need to direct an elaborate conspiracy involving hundreds of
candidates, but instead could simply request that the recipients of his largesse
transfer the funds to a party committee. There is no prohibition on a donor
"earmarking" contributions to a candidate for transfer to a political party. See
2 U.S.C. § 441a(a)(8). These contributions could then be aggregated in party
coffers and ultimately spent to benefit the donor's preferred candidates.

   Appellants and their amici suggest that these circumvention schemes are
"implausible" or "hypothetical" but fail to recognize that there are significant
incentives for candidates to serve as intermediaries in this scheme. See Br. of
NRSC and NRCC as Amici Curiae Supp. Pls.-Appellants at 30. It is already typical
for candidates to fundraise for other candidates and officeholders in their
party. In 2012, leadership PACs contributed approximately $ 46 million to
federal candidates, either by donating their own funds or serving as
intermediaries for other contributors. See Ctr. for Responsive Pol., Leadership
PACs [**30]  , http:// www.opensecrets.org/pacs/industry.php?txt=Q03&cycle=2012
(last visited July 10, 2013). n20 As amici NRSC  [*19]  and NRCC admit, direct
candidate-to-candidate giving is also significant: in 2012, contributions from
candidate campaign committees to other candidate campaign committees totaled
over $ 3.6 million. NRSC and NRCC Br. 29. The incentives for peer-to-peer giving
are clear. Prolific contributors reap both the indirect benefit of enhanced
political standing and clout among their peers, and the more tangible benefits
of "prestige committee assignments, committee leadership positions, extended
leadership positions and, in the majority party, . . . greater floor access for
their legislation." n21 Therefore, it is customary for Members seeking key
committee assignments or leadership positions to give generously to their peers:
some of the biggest donors in 2012 were, unsurprisingly, Speaker of the House
John Boehner's leadership PAC ($ 1,725,000 in contributions) and House Minority
Whip Steny Hoyer's leadership PAC ($ 1,448,000 in contributions). Ctr. for
Responsive Pol., Leadership PACs, supra.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n20 Several PACs that were headed by non-federal or former federal
officeholders were included in the tally, but their aggregate giving comprised
less than $ 1.5 million. Ctr. for Responsive Pol., Leadership PACs, supra.
 [**31]



   n21 Eric S. Heberlig & Bruce A. Larson, Congressional Parties and the
Mobilization of Leadership PAC Contributions, 16 Party Pol. 451, 454 (2010)
(internal citations omitted).


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The incidence of candidate-to-candidate contributions, as well as the entire
phenomenon of leadership PACs, attests to the substantial advantages created by
such giving. If aggregate limits were eliminated, big donors wishing to route
money in excess of the base limits to their preferred candidates would likely
[*20]  find a host of willing intermediaries among the candidates' peers.

2. Invalidation of the Aggregate Limits Would Allow Candidates to Solicit
Multi-Million Dollar Checks, Recreating the Corruptive Practices That
Necessitated the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act.

   Absent the aggregate limits, candidates would be able to solicit donors for
huge sums of money that in appearance and effect would be the equivalent of
"soft money donations," i.e., money not subject to the federal limits, but would
be treated as the aggregation of numerous hard money contributions.

   The Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act [**32]  (BCRA) amended FECA to provide
that federal party committees, as well as federal officeholders and candidates,
"may not solicit, receive, or direct to another person a contribution, donation
or transfer of funds or any other thing of value . . . that are not subject to
[FECA's] limitations, prohibitions, and reporting requirements. . . ." 2 U.S.C.
§ 441i(a)(1), (e)(1). Otherwise put, a federal officeholder or candidate can
only solicit, receive, direct or transfer hard money subject to the federal
contribution limits.

   These solicitation restrictions would be functionally nullified if the
aggregate limits were to be invalidated. Because one donor would be able to give
a joint fundraising committee a single check for over  [*21]  $ 600,000 in funds
that are subject to FECA's hard money limits, candidates would be able to
solicit eye-popping sums while technically remaining in compliance with the
solicitation restriction.

   Further, candidates and parties would likely work together to ensure that
candidates who solicit large amounts for their parties would also be the
beneficiaries of the spending by their parties. In addition to joint fundraising
practices,  [**33]  certain federal party committees have also employed a "tally
system," wherein the party keeps informal records of the money that a candidate
raises for her party and credits those funds to either that candidate's campaign
or to any other candidates of her choice. See, e.g., FEC v. Colorado Republican
Fed. Campaign Comm. (Colorado II), 533 U.S. 431, 459 (2001) (noting that tally
system made party committees conduits for unearmarked contributions by
"connect[ing] donors to candidates through the accommodation of a party"); id.
at 460 n.23.

   Thus, in a regime without aggregate limits, one can foresee that a candidate
headlining joint fundraising efforts would make solicitations for massive
contributions. As discussed in Section I.B., the "Entire Party Joint Fundraising
Committee" comprised of all of the federal and state committees of the
candidate's party would be able to raise over $ 600,000 per year and $ 1.2
million per election cycle from a single donor. The candidate could solicit
donors for this amount, because such contributions will  [*22]  technically be
within the federal limits and are thus permitted by the solicitation
restrictions.  [**34]  Once allocated to the participating party committees, the
contributions could be transferred to a single party committee, where they could
be used for the benefit of the candidate who participated in the fundraising
effort and solicited the money. Such an arrangement would plainly enable a
candidate to solicit huge contributions for her own campaign -- she need only
direct the money through a party joint fundraising committee with the
understanding that the party committees would spend it for her benefit.

   These scenarios are not fanciful. The history of campaign finance shows that
when it comes to maximizing the raising and spending of campaign money, what can
be done will be done. Only the aggregate limits now act as the critical bulwark
against such easy and open circumvention of the underlying contribution limits.

II. The Governmental Interests That Were Found in Buckley to Support the
Constitutionality of the Original $ 25,000 Aggregate Limit Support the Current
Aggregate Limits.

A. The Aggregate Limits Block Circumvention of the Base Contribution Limits.

   In Buckley, the Supreme Court found that the $ 25,000 aggregate limit was
justified principally [**35]  by  [*23]  the governmental interest in preventing
circumvention of FECA's base contribution limits, explaining:


     But this quite modest restraint upon protected political activity
     serves to prevent evasion of the $ 1,000 contribution limitation by a
     person who might otherwise contribute massive amounts of money to a
     particular candidate through the use of unearmarked contributions to
     political committees likely to contribute to that candidate, or huge
     contributions to the candidate's political party.


424 U.S. at 38.

   The same circumvention schemes outlined by Buckley remain possible today, and
continue to justify the challenged aggregate limits. Absent the aggregate
limits, contemporary donors could still circumvent the base contribution limits
by making "unearmarked contributions to political committees likely to
contribute to [their preferred] candidate." Similarly, without the challenged
limits, donors could still route "massive amounts of money" to their preferred
candidates by donating a "huge contribution" in the form of aggregated hard
money contributions to the candidates' political party. Appellants' attempts to
prove otherwise are [**36]  untenable.

    [*24]  1. The $ 74,600 Aggregate Limit on Contributions to Party Committees
and PACs

   Appellants do not contest that Buckley explicitly sustained the $ 25,000
limit, the predecessor of the limits challenged here, on grounds that it
deterred evasion of the base contribution limits. Attempting to escape this
governing precedent, however, they claim that amendments to the law after
Buckley now prohibit the circumvention feared by the Buckley Court, and that
consequently the $ 74,600 aggregate limit is no longer justified.

   In so arguing, appellants rely on a faulty and incomplete history of FECA's
enactment and amendment. They also rely on an incorrect understanding of
Buckley's holding, claiming that the Court was motivated not by a broad concern
about circumvention, but rather by much narrower fears of "political committee
proliferation" and the specter of "unlimited" contributions to the political
parties. Because appellants' premises fail, so too does their argument that the
post-Buckley amendments to the law "solved" the "conduit contribution concern"
identified in Buckley.

   a. Appellants Rely Upon a Flawed History of FECA's Enactment.  [**37]

   At the time Buckley was decided, the original FECA had already undergone a
round of amendments. See FECA Amendments of 1974 ("1974 Amendments"),   Pub. L.
No. 93-443,    88 Stat. 1263. In addition to the  [*25]  aggregate limits, the
1974 Amendments added, inter alia, the following provisions relevant to this
case:


     . Contribution limits, including a $ 1,000 limit on contributions to
     candidates; and a $ 5,000 limit on contributions from a political
     committee (including party committee) to a candidate. Id. § 101(a), 88
     Stat. at 1263 (codified as amended at 2 U.S.C. §§ 441a(a)(1)-(2)).

     . Party coordinated spending limits restricting the amount a party
     could spend in coordination with their presidential, senatorial and
     congressional nominees. Id. § 101(a), 88 Stat. at 1265-66 (codified as
     amended at 2 U.S.C. § 441a(d)).

     . An earmarking provision providing that contributions that were
     earmarked or "otherwise directed through an intermediary or conduit"
     to a candidate would be deemed a contribution from the original [**38]
     donor. Id. § 101(a), 88 Stat. at 1264 (codified as amended at 2 U.S.C.
     § 441a(a)(8)).

     . A provision banning contributions "in the name of another." Id. §
     101(f), 88 Stat. at 1267-68 (codified as amended at 2 U.S.C. § 441
     (f)).


Following the Buckley decision, the FECA Amendments of 1976 ("1976 Amendments"),

  Pub. L. No. 94-283,    90 Stat. 475, included a few additional provisions
highlighted by appellants:


      [*26]  . Additional contribution limits, including a $ 20,000 limit
     on contributions to national party committees; and a $ 5,000 limit on
     contributions to multicandidate committees. Id. sec. 112(2), §
     320(a)(1)(B)-(C), 90 Stat. at 487 (codified as amended at 2 U.S.C. §§
     441a(a)(1)(B)-(C)).

     . A transfer provision providing that transfers between national state
     and local committees of the same political party are not subject to
     the contribution limits. Id. sec. 112(2), § 320(a)(4), 90 Stat. at 487
     (codified as amended at 2 U.S.C. § 441a(a)(4)  [**39]  ).

     . An "anti-proliferation" provision stating that contributions from
     committees established, financed, maintained or controlled by the same
     corporation, union, organization or person would be deemed to have
     been made by a single political committee. Id. sec. 112(2), §
     320(a)(5), 90 Stat. at 487-88 (codified as amended at 2 U.S.C. § 441a
     (a)(5)).

   Appellants' description of this history is misleading. They are correct in
stating that the "anti-proliferation" provision was passed in 1976, but this
provision is not relevant to the function of the aggregate limit, as discussed
in the following section.

   Their discussion of the base contribution limits is fatally incomplete. It is
true that in 1974, FECA contained no limits on contributions to political party
committees or to PACs. It was not until 1976 that  [*27]  Congress added a $
20,000 limit on contributions to a national party committee, and a $ 5,000 limit
on contributions to multicandidate PACs. See 1976 Amendments, sec. 112(2), §
320(a)(1)(B)-(C), 90 Stat. at 487. But appellants fail to mention that at the
time of Buckley, candidates were limited [**40]  in how much they could accept
from party committees and multicandidate committees. Party committees and PACs
could contribute only $ 5,000 to a candidate, although the parties were
permitted to make a prescribed amount of coordinated expenditures in connection
to a candidate as well. See 1974 Amendments, § 101(a), 88 Stat. at 1263,
1265-66; see also Buckley, 424 U.S. at 13 n.12, 35-36. Thus, even without the $
25,000 aggregate limit, at the time of Buckley, a donor could not route an
"unlimited" contribution through parties and PACs to a particular candidate.

   Finally, appellants are simply wrong in suggesting that the earmarking
provision included in the 1974 Amendments, § 101(a), 88 Stat. at 1264, and the
"in the name of another" prohibition, id. § 101(f), were first enacted after
Buckley. See McCutcheon Br. 42-43, 43 n.20; RNC Br. 38-39. Both were passed as
part of the 1974 Amendments and were thus in effect when Buckley was decided.
n22

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n22 Appellants' confusion may stem from the fact that the 1976 Amendments
transferred these provisions -- in language identical to then-existing law --
from title 18 to title 2 of the U.S. Code. See H. R. Rep. 94-1057, at 53 (1976)
(Conf. Rep.), reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 946, 968.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**41]

    [*28]  b. Appellants Mischaracterize Buckley in an Attempt to Characterize
the Aggregate Limits as Redundant.

   After constructing this flawed history of FECA's enactment and amendment,
appellants argue that the 1976 amendments to the law addressed Buckley's
circumvention concerns. But to make this argument, appellants must not only
distort the history of the Act, but also must distort the holding of Buckley. In
effect, they are "reverse-engineering" the concerns they claim informed the
Buckley decision to "match" the changes to the law that postdated the decision:
only by thus mischaracterizing the reasoning of Buckley can they maintain their
unsustainable claim that subsequent amendments to the law rendered the aggregate
limits obsolete.

   Thus, because an "anti-proliferation" law was passed after Buckley,
appellants unsurprisingly assert that the "analytical key" to the Court's
decision to uphold the $ 25,000 aggregate limit was concern about donors giving
to a "proliferation of political committees," i.e., multiple committees
controlled by a single individual or entity. RNC Br. 17-18. Appellants claim
that the 1976 Amendments to FECA fully addressed [**42]  this concern, and
therefore rendered the aggregate limits redundant. Id. at 21-22.

   The problem with this argument is that the Buckley Court did not even mention
"political-committee proliferation" in its analysis of the $ 25,000 aggregate
limit, and certainly did not suggest that  [*29]  political committees under
common control represented the only avenue for circumvention. See Buckley, 424
U.S. at 38. The Court's decision to uphold the $ 25,000 aggregate limit was
instead animated by the far broader concern that donors seeking to give
contributions in excess of the federal limits to their favored candidate would
simply channel "unear-marked contributions to political committees likely to
contribute to that candidate." Id. The inapplicability of "political-committee
proliferation" to the analysis of the $ 25,000 aggregate limit is made apparent
by appellants' failure to offer any textual support other than a passage
imported from an entirely different section of Buckley. RNC Br. 18 (citing 424
U.S. at 28 n.31) (discussing $ 1,000 base contribution limitation). Further, a
plain reading of the Court's discussion of the type of circumvention [**43]
that the aggregate limit thwarted -- i.e., the donation of "unearmarked
contributions to political committees likely to contribute to [the donor's
preferred] candidate" -- also contradicts appellants' proliferation argument.
424 U.S. at 38 (emphasis added). Multiple committees under the control of single
donor are not merely likely to contribute to a preferred candidate; instead such
committees will certainly contribute in the manner directed by this donor --
that is the entire point of common control. Buckley's articulation of the threat
thus does not comport with the nature of appellants' "anti-proliferation"
theory.

   Second, appellants contend that the Buckley Court sustained the aggregate
limit only because it  [*30]  feared that otherwise individuals could make
"unlimited" contributions to political parties and PACs, which then could be
funneled to their preferred candidates. McCutcheon Br. 41. This alleged fear,
according to appellants, was alleviated by the enactment of additional
contribution limits by the 1976 Amendments. Id. at 41-42. But as described in
the foregoing section, both party committees and PACs in 1974 were subject to
[**44]  limits on how much they could contribute to, or spend in coordination
with, candidates. Thus, even without the $ 25,000 aggregate limit, the law at
the time of Buckley would not have permitted donors to route "unlimited"
contributions through parties and PACs to a particular candidate. Because the
amount of money that could pass through a party or PAC was already restricted,
the limits on contributions to a party or PAC added by the 1976 Amendments had
at most a limited effect on circumvention.

   Indeed, absent the aggregate limits, a donor today could route virtually as
much money through a party committee to a candidate as she could have at the
time of Buckley. To be sure, at the time of Buckley, the donor could have made
unlimited contributions to a political party absent the aggregate limits. But,
similarly, a donor today could contribute a massive sum exceeding $ 1 million to
a party absent the aggregate limits: she would simply have to route the money
through its three federal committees and 50 state committees. In 1975, the party
in turn could have contributed $ 5,000 of this donation to the  [*31]  donor's
preferred House candidate n23 and made $ 10,000 in coordinated [**45]
expenditures. 1974 Amendments, § 101(a), 88 Stat. at 1265-66. In 2013, the party
could have contributed $ 5,000 of the donation to the donor's preferred House
candidate and made $ 46,600 in coordinated expenditures. See FEC, 2013
Coordinated Party Expenditure Limits,
http://www.fec.gov/info/charts_441ad_2013.shtml (last visited July 19, 2013).
Thus, although new contribution limits have been enacted post-Buckley, they have
done little to block the circumvention that Buckley feared.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n23 These are the coordinated party spending limits for House candidates in
states with more than one Representative.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Finally, in a statement that flatly contradicts the holding of Buckley,
appellants assert that this Court should only be concerned about circumvention
when contributions to a party or PAC are "earmarked" for a particular candidate.
Without this designation, appellants contend, a contribution funneled through a
"pass-through" entity to a donor's candidate of choice "is non-cognizable [**46]
as a conduit-contribution concern." RNC Br. 49.

   Once more, appellants insinuate that the passage of new laws ameliorated the
dangers of earmarked contributions. McCutcheon Br. 42-43 (suggesting that
Congress specifically addressed problem of donors "channeling contributions
through a PAC or political party committee"). But as the foregoing history of
FECA confirms, the earmarking provision was  [*32]  enacted in 1974. Thus, the
Buckley Court was aware that the law regulated earmarked contributions, see 424
U.S. at 23-24, and yet still found that the $ 25,000 aggregate limit was
necessary to forestall circumvention schemes involving the donation of "
unearmarked contributions to political committees likely to contribute to [a
donor's preferred] candidate." 424 U.S. at 38 (emphasis added). Directly at odds
with appellants' suggestion, it was precisely the flow of unearmarked
contributions that gave rise to circumvention concerns.

   Further, Buckley is hardly the only Supreme Court precedent to have found
that unearmarked contributions can pose a danger of circumvention. For example,
the plaintiffs in Colorado II argued that the coordinated [**47]  spending
limits were overbroad because any circumvention through parties could be more
narrowly addressed by application or enhancement of the earmarking rules. 533
U.S. at 462. While not disputing that the earmarking rules might prevent some
measure of circumvention -- namely, "the most clumsy attempts to pass
contributions through to candidates" -- the Supreme Court rejected the argument
that this regulation obviated the government's concerns. Id. As the Court noted,
"[plaintiffs'] position . . . ignores the practical difficulty of identifying
and directly combating circumvention under actual political conditions." Id.
Thus, far from endorsing appellants' claim that unearmarked contributions are by
definition benign, the Colorado II Court rejected the  [*33]  notion that "the
earmarking provision [was] the outer limit of acceptable tailoring." Id.

   In short, appellants have no basis for their misreading of Buckley, or for
their contention that post-Buckley amendments addressed the concerns that the
Court articulated there. An aggregate limit remains as relevant today as it was
when Buckley was decided.

   2. The $ 48,600 Aggregate  [**48]   Limit on Contributions to Candidates

   As documented in Section I.C. supra, candidates reap significant rewards for
contributing to, and serving as intermediaries for, other candidates and
officeholders. Eliminate the aggregate limits, and donors seeking to purchase
influence would use candidate campaign committees as yet another conduit for
channeling donations to their favored candidates.

   In addition, FECA permits candidates to transfer funds without limit to their
political party, so contributions to individual candidates can easily be
transferred to party coffers and aggregated for the benefit of a donor's
preferred candidates. An influence-seeking donor would not need to communicate
the details of the circumvention scheme every candidate to whom the donor
contributes, but rather could simply direct recipients to transfer the donations
to their party.

    [*34]  Nevertheless, appellants dispute that the $ 48,600 aggregate limit is
supported by an anti-circumvention interest, alleging that "[Buckley] did not
suggest a mechanism for how an unearmarked conduit-contribution might pass from
an individual, through a candidate committee, to another intended, particular
candidate.  [**49]  " RNC Br. 54. But appellants are incorrect. Buckley stated
broadly that the aggregate limit was necessary to avert circumvention schemes
involving "unearmarked contributions to political committees likely to
contribute to [a] candidate. . . ." 424 U.S. at 38 (emphasis added). The Court
did not suggest that candidate committees were to be exempted from the category
of "political committees" that could be used to circumvent the base limit, and
appellants do not even attempt to provide any rationale for such an exemption.

   Appellants also fail to acknowledge that Buckley can only be understood as
upholding the challenged aggregate limit as applied to contributions to
candidate committees. The $ 25,000 aggregate limit applied to contributions to
party committees, PACs, and candidate committees and was upheld on its face by
Buckley. If applying an aggregate limit to candidate contributions was
unconstitutional, then the $ 25,000 limit would have been fatally overbroad.
See, e.g., RNC Br. 52 (arguing that if the $ 74,600 limit were invalidated as
applied to federal party committees, the entire limit would be facially
overbroad). At the least, Congress [**50]  -- or a court -- would have to devise
a narrower measure exempting contributions to candidate  [*35]  committees from
the limit. The Buckley Court could not have logically sustained the $ 25,000
limit without finding that it was constitutional to impose an aggregate cap on
contributions to candidates.

   Likewise unavailing is the argument that conduit schemes involving candidate
committees cannot be corruptive, because no "'huge' contribution could be given
to a candidate committee, so no 'massive' conduit-contribution could be
channeled through one." RNC Br. 55. To be sure, individuals may only contribute
$ 5,200 in an election cycle to a particular candidate, and candidate committees
can only transfer $ 4,000 to another candidate committee per cycle. But
appellants misunderstand the nature of the circumvention scheme. The danger is
not that a donor will attempt to funnel a single large contribution through a
candidate committee to her favored candidate, but rather that she will
contribute many limited contributions to many candidate committees that will
pass on these funds to her favored candidates. By blocking donors from routing
hundreds of contributions to their [**51]  preferred candidates through
candidate committees, the aggregate limits are a crucial guard against political
corruption.

    [*36]  B. The Aggregate Limits Directly Serve the Governmental Interest in
Preventing Quid Pro Quo Corruption and the Appearance of Corruption.

   Although Buckley's discussion of the $ 25,000 aggregate limit focused
primarily on its anti-circumvention purpose, the current aggregate limits also
directly advance the goal of preventing actual and apparent corruption. As
Buckley acknowledged, the government may legitimately prohibit not only quid pro
quo corruption, but also practices that give rise to an appearance of such
corruption. A single donor giving multi-million dollar sums to the candidates
and committees of one party inarguably creates at least the appearance of
impropriety.

   Later cases have made the anti-corruption goals of the aggregate limits even
more explicit. In CalMed, this Court explained that Buckley had upheld both the
base limits on contributions to candidates and the $ 25,000 aggregate limit
because "such limitations served the important governmental interests in
preventing the corruption or appearance of corruption [**52]  of the political
process that might result if such contributions were not restrained." 453 U.S.
at 194-95 & n.15 (emphasis added).

   Most significantly, the Court in McConnell subsequently explained how large
"soft money" contributions to federal and state party committees --
contributions that are tantamount to the million-dollar sums in hard money that
appellants propose here -- create a  [*37]  threat of actual and apparent
corruption. Eliminating the aggregate limits would quickly result in a system of
massive contributions to parties that would be indistinguishable from the system
of "soft money" that was shut down by BCRA's enactment in 2002. See 540 U.S. at
144-45.

   Appellants counter that "the anti-corruption interest is not directly
implicated with contributions to national party committees," RNC Br. 25, but
this theory was rejected in McConnell. There, this Court recognized that
contributions to a candidate's party could create a sense of obligation no less
than a direct contribution to the candidate himself, 540 U.S. at 144-45, and
noted that "[t]his is particularly true of contributions to national parties,
with [**53]  which federal candidates and officeholders enjoy a special
relationship and unity of interest." Id. at 145. Because of this "close
affiliation," the national parties are placed "in a unique position, 'whether
they like it or not,' to serve 'as agents for spending on behalf of those who
seek to produce obligated officeholders.'" Id. (quoting Colorado II, 533 U.S. at
452). After surveying the voluminous record compiled by Congress in support of
the soft money limits, the McConnell Court concluded that "there is substantial
evidence to support Congress' determination that large soft-money contributions
to national political parties give rise to corruption and the appearance of
corruption." Id. at 154.

   McConnell also catalogued the dangers posed by the widespread practice of
officeholders soliciting soft money for other candidates and their party's
federal  [*38]  and state committees. See 540 U.S. at 181-84; see also id. at
308 (Kennedy, J., concurring). The majority noted that "[l]arge soft-money
donations at a candidate's or officeholder's behest give rise to all of the same
corruption concerns posed by contributions [**54]  made directly to the
candidate or officeholder." Id. at 182. Justice Kennedy further expounded in his
concurrence:


     The making of a solicited gift is a quid both to the recipient of the
     money and to the one who solicits the payment (by granting his
     request). Rules governing candidates' or officeholders' solicitation
     of contributions are, therefore, regulations governing their receipt
     of quids. This regulation fits under Buckley's anticorruption
     rationale.


Id. at 308 (Kennedy, J., concurring) (emphasis added).

   If the aggregate limits were to be invalidated, the soft money abuses deemed
corruptive in McConnell would quickly resurface. Invalidating the aggregate
limits would allow a single individual to donate over $ 1 million to a political
party's federal and state party committees in a two-year election cycle. The
federal and state party committees could transfer such contributions internally
without restriction, and aggregate the contributions in the account of one
recipient committee. There would be no functional difference between the massive
sum of hard money contributions that appellants wish to legalize here and the
soft money contributions [**55]  outlawed by BCRA.

    [*39]  Further, as discussed in Section I.C. supra, officeholders gain power
and influence on the Hill and in their parties by soliciting contributions for
other candidates and their parties. In the absence of the aggregate limits,
officeholders and candidates have every incentive to make solicitations for huge
aggregate amounts -- regardless of whether the money was ultimately used to
support their own campaign, or the campaigns of others. Just as this Court found
that solicitations by candidates for huge soft money contributions pose a danger
of corruption or the appearance of corruption, so too would candidates'
solicitation of donors for possibly millions of dollars in hard money
contributions give rise to corruption and the appearance of corruption.

   Contrary to appellants' suggestion, Citizens United v. FEC, 558 U.S. 310
(2010), did not question McConnell's conception of corruption in connection to
the soft money restrictions of Title I of BCRA. RNC Br. 37. Citizens United
dealt with the entirely distinct question of whether Congress may regulate
independent expenditures by corporations. See id. at 359. And [**56]  this Court
recently reaffirmed McConnell's holding on Title I, when, after Citizens United,
it summarily affirmed a three-judge district court decision that sustained
BCRA's restrictions on party soft money. RNC v. FEC, 698 F. Supp. 2d 150
(D.D.C.), aff'd, 130 S. Ct. 3544 (2010) (mem.).

   Moreover, although Buckley did not specifically consider limits on
contributions to political parties, its analysis of corruption supports their
constitutionality  [*40]  and is consistent with McConnell. The Buckley Court
emphasized that "[o]f almost equal concern as the danger of actual quid pro quo
arrangements is the impact of the appearance of corruption stemming from public
awareness of the opportunities for abuse inherent in a regime of large
individual financial contributions." 424 U.S. at 27 (emphasis added). See also
Citizens United, 558 U.S. at 357 ("The Buckley Court . . . sustained limits on
direct contributions in order to ensure against the reality or appearance of
corruption.") (emphasis added). Buckley made clear that the government had a
legitimate interest not only in outlawing [**57]  "the most blatant and specific
attempts of those with money to influence governmental action" but also in
preserving public confidence in government by prohibiting practices that created
an appearance of corruption. 424 U.S. at 27-28. Appellants all but ignore this
fundamental aspect of the concept of corruption articulated in Buckley.
Elimination of the aggregate limits would permit a single donor to contribute
over $ 1 million to her favored party and over $ 2 million to that party's
candidates in an election cycle. Appellants cannot credibly deny that this
quantum of giving would not create the appearance that the party's candidates
and officeholders were indebted to such donor -- and unsurprisingly, appellants
do not even attempt such a denial.

   Appellants also advance a more targeted attack on the $ 74,600 aggregate
limit, challenging it as applied to only the national party committees. See RNC
Br. 24. Even this fallback position, however, would  [*41]  allow a single
individual to donate, and an officeholder to solicit, a total of $ 194,400 to
the three national committees of a major political party in a two-year election
cycle. And in addition to this [**58]  $ 194,800, appellants propose that a
donor also be permitted to meet his $ 48,600 sub-limit for contributions to
state party committees and PACs, see RNC Br. 52-53, bringing the grand total of
potential contributions to party committees to $ 243,000. n24 Although appellant
McCutcheon claims that Buckley's approval of the aggregate limit was motivated
only by the fear of "unlimited contributions" to political parties, McCutcheon
Br. 41, the text of the decision provides no support for this proposition.
Compare 424 U.S. at 38 (expressing concern about "huge contributions" funneled
through political parties to candidates).  [*42]  Further, Supreme Court
precedent on this subject indicates that sums as small as $ 20,000 can be
problematic when routed to candidates in addition to the base limit amount. See,
e.g., Colorado II, 533 U.S. at 457-58 (noting that donors could circumvent the
base limits by giving, in addition to the base limits, $ 20,000 each year to a
national party committee supporting the candidate). Clearly a contribution of $
243,000 to a single party in an election cycle exceeds this standard.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n24 Appellants' final attempt to deny the corruptive potential of a $ 243,000
contribution to a political party is to assert that the Court cannot take into
account the ability of party committees to make unlimited internal transfers
when assessing the need for aggregate limits. According to appellants, Congress
passed the intra-party transfer provision because it believed that there was "no
conduit-contribution risk in transfers between federal committees of the same
political party." RNC Br. 20. But appellants' theory about Congress' intent
cannot be correct. The $ 25,000 aggregate limit was enacted as part of the 1974
amendments to FECA. The intra-party transfer provision was only first enacted in
1976. See supra Section II.A.1.a. Congress thus passed the transfer provision
after the enactment of the aggregate limit and in reliance on its existence.
Congress could not have considered the corruptive risk that unlimited
intra-party transfers might pose in the absence of an aggregate limit.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**59]

   Eliminating the aggregate limits would thus herald the return to a
pre-McConnell era when enormous contributions to parties and candidates were
freely solicited and often given by donors explicitly seeking favors from
elected officials.

[*43]  CONCLUSION

   For the foregoing reasons, this Court should affirm the judgment of the
district court.

   Respectfully submitted,

   TREVOR POTTER, Counsel of Record, J. GERALD HEBERT, TARA MALLOY, PAUL S.
RYAN, MEGAN MCALLEN, THE CAMPAIGN LEGAL CENTER, 215 E Street, N.E., Washington,
D.C. 20002, (202) 736-2200, tpotter@campaignlegalcenter.org

Counsel for Amici Curiae

   Dated: July 25, 2013


   [SEE APPENDIX A IN ORIGINAL]
